\input cyginfo
@c WARNING!!!
@c THESE INSTALL NOTES ARE NOT YET GENERAL-PURPOSE
@c SINCE THERE IS NO ESTABLISHED INSTALLATION PROCEDURE FOR CYGNUS 
@c RELEASES FROM THE DEVELOPMENT DIRECTORIES.
@c THESE NOTES MUST BE EDITED BY HAND FOR EACH RELEASE.
@c $Id$
@setfilename README.info
@iftex
@c We don't actually want a titlepage; HEADINGSon is usually called by
@c @end titlepage to turn on footers and headers.
@HEADINGSon
@setchapternewpage off
@finalout
@end iftex
@c 
@c WARNING: NONSTANDARD USAGE we need \tensf for print, without
@c upsetting info.  We weren't using @b in this note, so I redefine it:
@tex
\global\def\b#1{{\tensf #1}}
\global\def\date{November 1991}
\global\def\manvers{release m88k--11--91}
\parindent=0pt
@end tex

@node Top, Contents, (dir), (dir)
@unnumbered Installation and Release Notes


@table @strong
@item Cygnus Support M88K Developer's Kit
@item release m88k--11--91
@iftex
@item @date
@item {}
@item Contents
@display
@altref
@ref{Contents,,Release Contents}.
@ref{Platforms,,Supported Platforms}.
@ref{Installing,,Installation From Tape}.
@ref{Removing,,Removing the Developer's Kit}.
@ref{Cygnus-FSF,,Cygnus and FSF Releases}.
@ref{Cygnus-Support,,Cygnus Support}.
@altref
@end display
@end iftex
@end table

@menu
* Contents::                    Release Contents 
* Platforms::                   Supported Platforms
* Disk::                        Disk Space
* Installing::                  Installation From Tape
* Removing::                    Removing the Developer's Kit
* Bugs::                        Where to report bugs
* Cygnus-FSF::                  Cygnus and FSF Releases
* Cygnus-Support::              Cygnus Support
@end menu

This note is about the Cygnus M88K Developer's Kit: what's in it and how to
install it.

@node Contents, Platforms, Top, Top
@unnumberedsec Release Contents 

This Developer's Kit is a Cygnus Support Release: the programs in the
release have been tested both individually and as a coordinated suite of
tools.

The programs in this Developer's Kit are shipped as binaries,
preconfigured to run on Motorola 88K-based workstations ``out of the
box.''

We also include the full source code.

The individual programs are:

@itemize @bullet
@item 
@sc{gnu emacs} (v18.57), the extensible text editor
@item 
@sc{gcc} (v1.95.02), the @sc{gnu} C compiler
@item 
@sc{g++} (v1.95.02), the @sc{gnu} C++ compiler
@item
@sc{gdb} (v4.2.2), the @sc{gnu} debugger
@end itemize

@node Platforms, Disk, Contents, Top
@unnumberedsec Supported Platforms
@table @strong
@item 88open BCS
Release m88k--11--91 of the Cygnus Developer's Kit is supported on any
system running an 88open compliant operating system.

@item Other Platforms
The Developer's Kit is likely to work when compiled for other machines,
but no other platforms are currently
@iftex
(@date)
@end iftex
supported by Cygnus as part of Release m88k--11--91. @refill
@end table
@node Disk, Installing, Platforms, Top
@unnumberedsec Disk Space

The total space required to extract and install binaries for
all programs in Release m88k--11--91 is 32 megabytes.

The software is configured to go in @file{/usr/cygnus}; if you have
space available, but not in the same file system as @file{/usr}, you can
create @file{/usr/cygnus} as a symbolic link to the file system where
you do have the space available.

@node Installing, Removing, Disk, Top
@unnumberedsec Installation From Tape

@iftex
This note shows computer output in @code{typewriter font}.  User input
is indicated by a @b{sans-serif font}.  Comments appear in @i{italic
font}.
@end iftex
In all examples, the system name is assumed to be ``@code{eg};'' we show the
system prompt as @samp{eg$}.

@menu
* Tape-Reading::                Reading the Tape
* Running::                     Running the Programs
@end menu

@node Tape-Reading, Running, Installing, Installing
@unnumberedsubsec Reading the Tape

For certification purposes, the M88K Developer's Kit is packaged as two
QIC 150 tapes; one containing only binaries for all programs, and one
containing source.

Load the Cygnus Support binary tape into your system's tape drive.  
You can extract the complete tape contents as follows:
@lisp
@cartouche
eg$ @b{mkdir /usr/cygnus}    @i{only if /usr/cygnus did not exist}
eg$ @b{cd /usr/cygnus}
eg$ @b{tar xfv /dev/TAPE}
@end cartouche
@end lisp

This will create subdirectories @file{bin}, @file{lib}, and @file{man},
with the conventional meanings.

If you also want the source, for reference or modification, load the
Cygnus Support source tape into your tape drive, and repeat the
@code{tar} command:
@lisp
@cartouche
eg$ @b{tar xfv /dev/TAPE}
@end cartouche
@end lisp

@page
@node Running,  , Tape-Reading, Installing
@unnumberedsubsec Running the Programs
@c [FIXME-future:] orig includes fixincluded files...  "bogus
@c but easiest". In some future release, CUST MUST RUN fixincludes ONCE PER OS!
@c [FIXME] how to select cross vs native compiler?
Any users who wish to run the Cygnus development tools will need to make
sure the @code{PATH} environment variable will find them.  For example,
the following should go in a Bourne shell initialization file:
@lisp
@cartouche
@b{PATH=/usr/cygnus/bin:$PATH}
@end cartouche
@end lisp

To use the Cygnus man pages on line, you'll need to install them in your
system's @file{/usr/catman/u_man/man1} directory.  For example, you can
copy them like this:
@lisp
@cartouche
eg$ @b{cp /usr/cygnus/man/man1/* /usr/catman/u@t{_}man/man1}
@end cartouche
@end lisp

@node Removing, Bugs, Installing, Top
@unnumberedsec Removing the Developer's Kit
To remove this release of the Developer's Kit from your system
(if, eventually, you no longer want it):
@enumerate
@item
remove the man pages for this release from your system's
@file{/usr/catman/u_man/man1} directory, if you had chosen to install
them there.  For example, in a Bourne-compatible shell,
@lisp
@cartouche
eg$ @b{cd /usr/cygnus/man/man1}
eg$ @b{for m in *; do}
eg> @b{rm /usr/catman/u@t{_}man/man1/$m}
eg> @b{done}
@end cartouche
@end lisp
@item
delete the directory @file{/usr/cygnus} and all its contents.
@end enumerate

@node Bugs, Cygnus-FSF, Removing, Top
@unnumberedsec Where to report bugs
If you find a bug in this release, please report it to Cygnus Support.
The easiest way to report a bug is via Internet electronic mail to
@samp{bugs@@cygnus.com}; for other contact methods,
@pxref{Cygnus-Support,,Cygnus Support}.  @strong{Do not report these bugs
directly to the GNU project} at the Free Software Foundation!  Cygnus is
distributing an early release of advanced versions of the GNU compiler
and development tools, and we therefore have full responsibility for
supporting this release.  @strong{The FSF will not respond to bugreports
on this software} until release 2.0 of the compilers.  You, the FSF, and
Cygnus will all be best served if you send bugreports directly to Cygnus
Support. 

@page
@node Cygnus-FSF, Cygnus-Support, Bugs, Top
@unnumberedsec Cygnus and FSF Releases

The tools in this Developer's Kit are originally from the Free Software
Foundation, and versions of all these tools can be obtained from the FSF
as well as from Cygnus.  Release m88k--11--91 contains the most current
versions; similar versions of the compilers, in particular, will
eventually be available from the FSF as version 2.00.  In general,
Cygnus Releases add to FSF software as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Commercial support is available.  Cygnus adds value to FSF releases in
large measure by offering outstanding support services.
@item
Bug fixes.  Cygnus performs necessary repairs to bugs discovered
during testing, and also tracks and includes bug fixes developed for
other Cygnus customers or distributed over the Internet.
@item
Documentation.  Cygnus has revised and added to available FSF
documentation to give you better descriptions of all the software tools.
@item
Coordination.  The tools in your Developer's Kit are certified to work
together; you need not worry about one tool being ahead of another.
@end itemize

@tex
@page
@end tex
@node Cygnus-Support,  , Cygnus-FSF, Top
@unnumberedsec Cygnus Support

Cygnus Support was founded in 1989 to provide commercial support for
free software.  Cygnus supplies products and services that benefit
advanced development groups by allowing them to @emph{use}
state-of-the-art tools instead of @emph{maintaining} them.  With Cygnus
Support, sites that once were forced to do their own tool support can
recover that valuable staff time.  Former users of proprietary software
now may choose supported free software, combining the advantages of both
worlds.

Free software is faster, more powerful, and more portable than its
proprietary counterparts.  It evolves faster because users who want to
make improvements are free to do so.  Cygnus tracks these
improvements and integrates them into tested, stable versions ready
for commercial use, then backs this software with comprehensive
support.

With Cygnus Support as your partner, you will have the software and
the support you need to meet your business objectives better.  Cygnus
is intimately familiar with this software from extensive experience
using, debugging, and implementing it.  You get direct access to the
most qualified support people: the authors of that software.

We provide ``vintage'' releases---stable versions which have been
though extensive use and testing---or up-to-the minute sources, for
those who need the very latest version.  Vintage releases undergo at
least nine months of intensive use before certification as vintage.

Because all our improvements are also free software, you can
distribute them widely within your organization, or to your customers,
without extra cost.

@display
Cygnus Support
814 University Avenue
Palo Alto, CA 94301, USA

+1 415 322 3811

email: @code{info@@cygnus.com}
fax: +1 415 322 3270
@end display

@bye
