@c \input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@c @setfilename arc-cmds.info
@c @settitle ARC specific commands
@c @setchapternewpage off
@c %**end of header

@node ARC
@subsection ARC

GDB for ARC supports the ARC600 and ARC700 cores.

On ARC700, you can debug linux applications using gdbserver.  On
ARC700 and ARC600, you can debug any program using the arcjtag target.


@menu
* ARC specific commands::        ARC specific commands
@end menu

@node ARC specific commands, , , ARC
@subsection ARC specific commands

These commands can only be used when GDB has been build for ARC.


@menu
* target arcjtag::                  Use the JTAG target
* arc-reset-board::                 Reset the ARC board
* arc-aux-read::                    Read a range of auxillary registers
* arc-aux-write::                   Write an auxillary register
* info arc-bcr-registers::          Show build configuration registers

Debugging:
* set arcjtag-debug-statemachine::  JTAG state machine debugging messages
* set arcjtag-debug-target::        arcjtag target debugging messages
@end menu

@node target arcjtag
@subsubsection target arcjtag

Usage: @code{target arcjtag}

Connect to the arcjtag target.

This target expects the ARC board to be connected to the parallel port
on the host.  Currently we support debugging only on GNU/Linux hosts.

This target uses the gpio device to access the parallel.  You must
have the gpio driver installed and you must have read/write privileges
to /dev/gpio.


@node arc-reset-board
@subsubsection arc-reset-board

Usage: @code{arc-reset-board}

Reset the board.

For this command to work, you must be connected to the arcjtag target,
by using the command @code{target arcjtag}.


@node arc-aux-read
@subsubsection arc-aux-read

Usage: @code{arc-aux-read <REG-FROM> [<REG-TO>]}

Read and show a range of auxillary registers.
REG-FROM and REG-TO can be any expressions that evaluate to integers.
REG-TO is optional; if it is not specified, only one register is displayed.

For example:
@example
(gdb) arc-aux-read 0x400 0x406
00000400: 00000100 80001abc 00001620 00200000
00000404: 00000100 00000000 00000000
@end example

For this command to work, you must be connected to the arcjtag target,
by using the command @code{target arcjtag}.



@node arc-aux-write
@subsubsection arc-aux-write

Usage: @code{arc-aux-write <REG> = <VALUE>}

Write to an auxillary register.
REG and VALUE can be any expressions that evaluate to integers.

For example:
@example
(gdb) arc-aux-write 6 = 0x123
@end example

For this command to work, you must be connected to the arcjtag target,
by using the command @code{target arcjtag}.

@node info arc-bcr-registers
@subsubsection info arc-bcr-registers

Usage: @code{info arc-bcr-registers}

Show all the build configuration registers.

For example:
@example
(gdb) info arc-bcr-registers
[61] DCCM_BASE_BUILD : 0x1010121
[62] CRC_BASE_BUILD  : 0x00
[63] BTA_LINK_BUILD  : 0x1010121
[64] DVBF_BUILD      : 0x00
[65] TEL_INSTR_BUILD : 0x00
[67] MEMSUBSYS       : 0x01
[68] VECBASE_AC_BUILD : 0x01
[69] P_BASE_ADDRESS  : 0xfc0001
[6f] MMU_BUILD       : 0x1010121
[70] ARCANGEL_BUILD  : 0x1010121
[72] D_CACHE_BUILD   : 0x12001
[73] MADI_BUILD      : 0x00
[74] DCCM_BUILD      : 0x00
[75] TIMER_BUILD     : 0x303
[76] AP_BUILD        : 0x00
[77] ICACHE_BUILD    : 0x22001
[78] ICCM_BUILD      : 0x1010121
[79] DSPRAM_BUILD    : 0x1203
[7a] MAC_BUILD       : 0x00
[7b] MULTIPLY_BUILD  : 0x01
[7c] SWAP_BUILD      : 0x01
[7d] NORM_BUILD      : 0x02
[7e] MINMAX_BUILD    : 0x00
[7f] BARREL_BUILD    : 0x02
@end example

For this command to work, you must be connected to the arcjtag target,
by using the command @code{target arcjtag}.

@node set arcjtag-debug-statemachine
@subsubsection set arcjtag-debug-statemachine

Usage: @code{set arcjtag-debug-statemachine ARG}

Switch on JTAG state machine debugging messages if ARG is non-zero.
Switch them off if it is zero.

@node set arcjtag-debug-target
@subsubsection set arcjtag-debug-target

Usage: @code{set arcjtag-debug-target ARG}

Switch on JTAG target debugging messages if ARG is non-zero.
Switch them off if it is zero.
