@c Copyright (C) 2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
@c under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
@c any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
@c Invariant Sections being ``Free Software'' and ``Free Software Needs
@c Free Documentation'', with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
@c and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.
@c
@c (a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You are free to copy and modify
@c this GNU Manual.  Buying copies from GNU Press supports the FSF in
@c developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''

@node Poke
@section Poking at data using GNU @samp{poke}
@cindex GNU poke
@cindex poke

@uref{http://jemarch.net/poke.html,GNU poke} is an interactive,
extensible editor for binary data that implements a full-fledged
procedural, interactive domain specific language called @dfn{Poke}
(with capital P) that is specifically designed in order to describe
the layout of structured binary data and to operate on it.

@value{GDBN} integrates with GNU @samp{poke} by mean of the
@file{libpoke} library and offers the possibility of executing Poke
code from within the debugger, to inspect and modify data in the
target's memory.  This feature is available only if @value{GDBN} was
configured using @option{--enable-poke}.

As we shall see in the sections below, @value{GDBN} uses the
integration mechanisms provided by @file{libpoke} in order to make
certain @value{GDBN} abstractions (such as symbols and types) visible from the
Poke side, making the integration bidirectional.

Note that this section documents the integration of GNU @samp{poke}
and @value{GDBN} and how to use it, but it doesn't describe GNU
@samp{poke} nor the Poke language in detail. @xref{Top,,, poke, The
GNU poke Manual}, for more information.

@menu
* The @code{poke} Command::  Executing Poke from @value{GDBN}.
* Poking the Target Memory::    Accessing the target's memory from Poke.
* @value{GDBN} Types and Poke::         Accessing @value{GDBN} types from Poke.
* @value{GDBN} Values and Poke::        Accessing @value{GDBN} values from Poke.
@end menu

@node The @code{poke} Command
@subsection The @code{poke} Command

The @code{poke} command allows to execute arbitrary Poke code from the
@value{GDBN} prompt.

@table @code
@item poke @var{src}
@var{src} is either a Poke expression, statement or definition.
@end table

For example, this executes a simple Poke expression and shows the
result:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke 2 + 3UL
0x5UL
@end smallexample

This declares a couple of Poke types and a variable:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) type byte = uint<8>
(@value{GDBP}) type Packet = struct @{ byte magic == 0x4a; byte sz; \
                                       byte[sz] payload; @}
(@value{GDBP}) poke Packet @{ sz = 4 @}
Packet @{
  magic=0x4aUB,
  sz=0x4UB,
  payload=[0x0UB,0x0UB,0x0UB,0x0UB]
@}
(@value{GDBP}) var p = Packet @{ sz = 4 @}
(@value{GDBP}) poke p.payload
[0x0UB,0x0UB,0x0UB,0x0UB]
@end smallexample

This executes a Poke statement:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke for (i in [1,2,3]) printf "%v\n", i
0x00000001
0x00000002
0x00000003
@end smallexample

This shows how the Poke incremental compiler handles and reports
invalid input:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke 2 + fjsdio
<stdin>:1:5: error: undefined variable 'fjsdio'
2 + fjsdio;
    ^~~~~~
@end smallexample

The standard @command{load} Poke directive loads a Poke source file
and executes it in the incremental compiler.  The list of directories
where @command{load} looks for files is in the variable
@code{load_path}:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke load_path
".:/home/jemarch/.local/share/poke:%DATADIR%/pickles:%DATADIR%"
@end smallexample

This loads a file @file{foo.pk} if it is found in the load path:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke load foo
@end smallexample

Poke source files often contain definitions that conceptually apply to
some definite domain, like some given file format or a protocol.  We
call these files @dfn{pickles}.  For example, @file{elf.pk} is a
pickle that provides facilities to poke ELF object files.  The GNU
@samp{poke} editor comes with lots of already written pickles for many
file formats and other domains.  If you happen to have GNU poke
installed (and not just @file{libpoke}) you can also use the many
pickles distributed with the editor.  For example:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke load "std-types.pk"
(@value{GDBP}) poke load elf
(@value{GDBP}) poke Elf64_Rela @{@}
Elf64_Rela @{
  r_offset=0x0UL#B,
  r_info=Elf64_RelInfo @{
    r_sym=0x0U,
    r_type=0x0U
  @},
  r_addend=0x0L
@}
@end smallexample

The reason why @file{std-types.pk} has to be loaded before
@file{elf.pk} is explained later in this manual.

@node Poking the Target Memory
@subsection Poking the Target Memory

@value{GDBN} configures @file{libpoke} to access the target's memory
as an IO space device called @code{<gdb>}, which is automatically
opened when the poke incremental compiler is started.

This means that the default IO space in the running poke will provide
access to the virtual address space of the current @value{GDBN}
inferior.

For example, suppose that a string table is at offset 0x5ff0 bytes in
the target's memory.  We could map an array of Poke strings from it by
issuing:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke string[3] @@ 0x5ff0#B
["int", "long", "_pid"]
@end smallexample

And we can write to the target's memory:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke string[] @@ 0x5ff0#B = ["foo", "bar", "baz"]
@end smallexample

Note that the fact the current IO space is the @value{GDBN} target memory
doesn't mean you cannot access other IO spaces.  This is how you would
write the string table above to a file @file{strtab.out}:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) poke var f = open ("strtab.out", IOS_F_WRITE | IOS_F_CREATE)
(@value{GDBP}) poke string[] @@ f : 0#B = string[3] @@ 0x5ff0#B
(@value{GDBP}) poke close (f)
@end smallexample

If you close the default IO space you can re-open the @value{GDBN} target space
with @code{open ("<gdb>")}.

@node @value{GDBN} Types and Poke
@subsection @value{GDBN} Types and Poke

Maybe the strongest side of the Poke language is that it provides a
very rich and dynamic mechanism to describe the layout of data
structures.  This is done by defining @dfn{Poke types}.

For example, this is the definition of a signed 13-bit integral type
that could be used to poke immediate fields in SPARC instructions:

@smallexample
type simm13 = int<13>;
@end smallexample

And this is a simplified version of the structure of a 64-bit ELF file
showing more advanced Poke capabilities like field constraints, field
labels, absent fields, and methods:

@smallexample
type Elf64_File =
  struct
  @{
    Elf64_Ehdr ehdr : ehdr.e_ident.ei-mag == [0x7fUB, 'E', 'L', 'F'];

    Elf64_Shdr[ehdr.e_shnum] shdr @@ ehdr.e_shoff
      if ehdr.e_shnum > 0;

    Elf64_Phdr[ehdr.e_phnum] phdr @@ ehdr.e_phoff
      if ehdr.e_phnum > 0;

    /* Given an offset into the ELF file's section string table, return
       the string.  */

    method get_section_name = (offset<Elf_Word,B> offset) string:
      @{
        var strtab = ehdr.e_shstrndx;
        return string @@ (shdr[strtab].sh_offset + offset);
      @}
  @};
@end smallexample

This is all good and well for GNU @samp{poke} as a standalone binary editor,
but when it comes to @value{GDBN} we want to poke at data structures
in the target memory of the debugged program.  These structures are
described by language-specific types, which @value{GDBN} abstracts as
@value{GDBN} types, not Poke types.

For example, say we are debugging a C program that contains the
following type:

@smallexample
struct person
@{
  int age;
  char *name;
  char *postal_address;
@};
@end smallexample

If we wanted to poke at a struct person from poke, we would need to
write a Poke struct type that is equivalent to that C type.  This is
often not trivial, because the physical layout of data structures is
almost always not well defined in programming languages.

Fortunately, @value{GDBN} provides a few commands to translate
@value{GDBN} types to Poke types and inspect them.

@table @code
@item poke-add-type @var{expr}
@var{expr} is a @value{GDBN} expression that must evaluate to a type.

Translate a @value{GDBN} type to Poke and define it in the running
poke incremental compiler.  If the given type depends on other types
that are not known to poke, add these as well.

Types for which @value{GDBN} doesn't know how to create a Poke
equivalence are simply ignored.

@item poke-add-types @var{regexp}
@var{regexp} is a regular expression.

Translate all known types whose name matches @var{regexp} to Poke and
define them in the running poke incremental compiler.  If the matched
types depend on other types that are not known to poke, add these as
well.

Types for which @value{GDBN} doesn't know how to create a Poke
equivalence are simply ignored.

@item poke-dump-types
Dump the Poke definition of all translated types, one definition per
line.
@end table

Using these commands, we can add a type for the @code{struct person} C
type above like this:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke-add-type struct person
added type int
added type struct_person
@end smallexample

Note how two types are added: the requested @code{struct person} and
also @code{int}, since the struct contains a field of that basic C
type.  Let's take a look to the type definitions:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke-dump-types
type int = int<32>;
type struct_person = struct @{int age; offset<uint<64>,B> name @@ 8#B; \
offset<uint<64>,B> postal_address;@};
@end smallexample

If now we want to access a given variable of type @code{struct person}
in the current target, we just use the created Poke types:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke struct_person @@ 0xf00e#B
struct_person @{
  age=0x28,
  name=0x5555555547b4UL#B,
  postal_address=0x5555555547c5UL#B
@}
(@value{GDBN}) poke string @@ (struct_person @@ 0xf00e#B).postal_address
"Foo Street number 13"
@end smallexample

If we wanted to add all the types known to @value{GDBN} to poke, we could so do
by:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke-add-types .*
@end smallexample

The @command{poke-dump-types} is useful to generate Poke files with
type definitions to be used in GNU @samp{poke}, like this:

@smallexample
$ gdb -batch -ex poke-add-types .\* -ex poke-dump-types \
      -ex quit foo.so > foo-types.pk
@end smallexample

@node @value{GDBN} Values and Poke
@subsection @value{GDBN} Values and Poke

Poke variables are not the same than @value{GDBN} symbols, and live in
a separated world of their own.  However, it is possible to refer to
GDB values by using the @code{$IDENTIFIER} notation in Poke programs.

Consider for example a C program with the following variable:

@smallexample
short counter;
@end smallexample

In @value{GDBN} we can access to the value of that variable like this:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) counter
$1 = 0
@end smallexample

And from the poke side:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke $counter
0x0H
@end smallexample

Note how the @value{GDBN} value is visible using the right type, in
the case above a signed 16-bit integer.  If we accessed a C value of a
pointer type, like @code{char *str;}, we would get an offset with unit
bytes instead:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke $str
0x0UL#B
@end smallexample

Since many @value{GDBN} values are pointers, it is possible to access
the address of a value by using the @code{$addr::IDENTIFIER} notation.
For example, given the C @code{struct person} defined above and a
variable @code{struct person jemarch;}:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBN}) poke struct_person @@ $addr::jemarch
struct_person @{
  age=0x28,
  name=0x5555555547b4UL#B,
  postal_address=0x5555555547c5UL#B
@}
@end smallexample
