\input texinfo      @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c Copyright (C) 1997-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c
@c %**start of header
@setfilename sim.info
@settitle GNU simulator
@documentencoding UTF-8
@include simver.texi
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c A texinfo hack.  Pay it no mind.
@finalout

@c Summary of indexes used:
@c cp Concept index.
@c fn Public APIs index (functions).
@c tp Merge public data type index into the function index.
@syncodeindex tp fn
@c vr Merge public variable index into the function index.
@syncodeindex vr fn
@c sc Syscall index.
@defindex sc
@c dv Device models.
@defindex dv

@c This is a dir.info fragment to support semi-automated addition of
@c manuals to an info tree.
@dircategory Software development
@direntry
* Sim: (sim).                     The GNU simulator.
@end direntry

@c Link to online POSIX documentation.
@macro posix{section, page}
@url{https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/\section\/\page\.html, \page\(P)}
@end macro

@c Link to online Linux man pages.
@macro man{section, page}
@url{https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man\section\/\page\.\section\.html, \page\(\section\)}
@end macro

@c Projects that we refer to often.
@set bfd @url{https://www.gnu.org/software/bfd/,BFD}
@set cgen @url{https://sourceware.org/cgen/,CGEN}
@set elf @url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Executable_and_Linkable_Format,ELF}
@set libgloss @url{https://sourceware.org/newlib/,libgloss}
@set linux @url{https://www.kernel.org/,Linux}
@set man7 @url{https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/,Linux man pages}
@set newlib @url{https://sourceware.org/newlib/,newlib}
@set rtems @url{https://www.rtems.org/,RTEMS}
@set uboot @url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Das_U-Boot,Das U-Boot}

@c Terms that we use frequently.
@set crt @abbr{CRT,C runtime object}
@set cwd @abbr{cwd,current working directory}
@set pid @abbr{PID,Process Identifier}

@copying
@c man begin COPYRIGHT
Copyright @copyright{} 1997-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no
Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License''.

@c man end
@end copying

@ifnottex
This file documents the @sc{gnu} simulator.

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@titlepage
@c First the title page.
@title Simulating Systems
@subtitle The @sc{gnu} Simulator
@ifset VERSION_PACKAGE
@sp 1
@subtitle @value{VERSION_PACKAGE}
@end ifset
@sp 1
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@c GNU standards say to list principal human writers of the manual as the
@c authors, not the maintainers or authors of the Simulator itself.
@c Everyone will be listed in the Acknowledgements chapter.
@author Mike Frysinger

@c Then the copyright page.  This must be a page by itself after the titlepage.
@page
(Send bugs & comments to@*@value{BUGURL}.)
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c This is for html & pdf outputs.
@contents

@c This is for info outputs where @contents is automatically omitted.
@node Top, Overview
@top Simulating Systems

This file describes the @sc{gnu} simulator
@ifset VERSION_PACKAGE
@value{VERSION_PACKAGE}
@end ifset
version @value{VERSION}.

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
The GNU Simulator provides a reasonably fast functional simulation environment
for a variety of Instruction Set Architectures (ISAs) and device models (SoCs,
peripherals).

It can provide both functional simulation as well as cycle accurate simulation
(although the accuracy quality varies greatly by port).

Common uses include, but are not limited to, the following.
@itemize @bullet
@item Toolchain testing (e.g. @sc{gcc} or @sc{gdb}).
@item Bare-metal firmware development.
@item Quick experimentation via debugger integration.
@end itemize

This manual is useful to multiple audiences: users, integrators, and developers.

@node Simulation or Emulation
@section Simulation or Emulation?
Terminology is hard.  Depending on who you talk to and the time of day, the
terms "simulation" and "emulation" will often be used interchangeably.  Don't
spend too much time thinking about it.

The GNU Simulator does not utilize virtualization.  It is only a simulator.

@node Why Another Simulator
@section Why Another Simulator?
There are many simulators out there, so one might ask why do we need another?

The GNU Simulator, while not well known, has been around in one form or another
since at least 1992!  It predates many open source projects out there, even if
it never quite gained the largely community that others enjoy.

Its integration with existing GNU toolchain projects makes it a good choice for
automated testing and new target bring-ups.

Its simplicity makes it a good target for bringing up a new architecture quickly
and proving out basic functionality.

All that said, the GNU Simulator does not really aspire to be more popular or
"better" than other open source tools.  It is maintained under the GNU banner,
and in the hopes that others will find it useful.

If another FOSS simulator works well for you, then by all means, use it instead!

@node Other Simulators
@section Other Simulators
The currently most common open source project is of course
@url{https://www.qemu.org/, QEMU}.  It has a much larger & active community,
tends to support more architectures, has more device models, and is
significantly faster than the GNU Simulator.

The @url{https://sourceware.org/sid/, SID} project seemingly overlaps a lot with
the GNU Simulator.  It is an independent code base, and was designed more for
modeling whole systems, and providing a framework for creating new models that
anyone could integrate.  While it was quite ahead of its time, it hasn't seen
development in a long time, and is effectively dormant at this point.  It would
be interesting to see if the GNU Simulator could somehow leverage its existing
corpus of models.

There are a few simulators out there that are actually forked from old versions
of the GNU Simulator.

And of course, there are a variety of proprietary (i.e. non-FOSS) simulators,
but by their very nature, are not interesting :).

Finally, remember that this is only about simulation, not virtualization.

@node Contact and Support
@section Contact and Support
There are a number of ways you can get in touch!

@itemize
@item Homepage @url{@value{HOMEPAGE}}
@item Wiki @url{https://sourceware.org/gdb/wiki/Sim}
@item Issue Tracker
@itemize
@item New Reports @value{BUGURL}
@item @url{https://sourceware.org/bugzilla/buglist.cgi?bug_status=UNCONFIRMED&bug_status=NEW&bug_status=ASSIGNED&bug_status=SUSPENDED&bug_status=WAITING&bug_status=REOPENED&component=sim,Existing Reports}
@end itemize
@item Mailing Lists @url{https://sourceware.org/gdb/mailing-lists/}
(we use the same lists as @sc{gdb})
@end itemize

@node Contributing
@section Contributing
Thanks for considering helping out.  There are many ways to contribute, and many
areas that could use your help.

If you want to report a bug, either a compile failure, or runtime misbehavior,
check out @ref{Reporting Bugs} section.

If you want to request a feature or new functionality, we also use the bug
tracker to manage things.  @xref{Contact and Support} has links.

If you're looking for things to help fix, we maintain a rough TODO list in
@url{https://sourceware.org/gdb/wiki/Sim/TODO,our wiki}.  Feel free to dive in
to anything listed there.

If you're not comfortable writing code, that's OK---we have documentation too
(like this manual!) that can always use review and improvement.

@node Free Software
@unnumberedsec Free Software
The GNU Simulator is @dfn{free software}, protected by the @sc{gnu} General
Public License (GPL).  The GPL gives you the freedom to copy or adapt a licensed
program---but every person getting a copy also gets with it the freedom to
modify that copy (which means that they must get access to the source code), and
the freedom to distribute further copies.  Typical software companies use
copyrights to limit your freedoms; the Free Software Foundation uses the GPL to
preserve these freedoms.

Fundamentally, the General Public License is a license which says that you have
these freedoms and that you cannot take these freedoms away from anyone else.

@node Running The Simulator
@chapter Running The Simulator
The primary method for running the GNU Simulator is via the @command{run}
program.  It usually is part of a cross-compiler toolchain which has a tool
prefix, e.g. @command{arm-none-elf-run}.  @xref{Config Names}.

It is given the program to simulate.  It understands any format that @value{bfd}
understands---typically, this means @value{elf} programs.  You can control the
format via the @option{--target} option---@command{binary} is a common one to
load a blob directly into memory.

The program could be a boot loader (e.g. @value{uboot}), or bare-metal programs
you wrote (i.e. no OS), or an OS kernel itself (e.g. @value{rtems} or
@value{linux}), or typical userland programs (e.g. @command{ls}).

Another common usage pattern is via @sc{gdb} itself.  @xref{GDB Integration} for
more details.

Many simulator subsystems may be disabled at build time, so not all options
described below may be available in your simulator.  Even if they are available,
not all architecture backends support every specific feature.

@node CLI Invocation
@section Invocation
Running the simulator is fairly straightforward.  It takes the basic form:
@example
$ run [simulator options] [VAR=VALUE|--] <program> [program options]

$ run hello.elf
$ run HOME=/tmp arm.elf
@end example

Multiple environment variables may be specified before @var{program}.  If
@option{--} is used, then environment variable processing is halted, and the
remaining arguments will be treated as the @var{program} and its own options.

@node Common Options
@section Common Options
Here's the common, albeit boring, options.

@table @option
@item --
Halt all further option processing.  This can be useful in scripts to force a
break between simulator options and the @var{program} to run.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Print help information.  This can show a quick summary of all the options that
a particular build actually supports.

@item --version
Print version information.

@item -v
@itemx --verbose
Enable more verbose output.

@item --do-command <comman>
Execute a simulator @var{command}.  These are the same as the command line
options, but as a string and with leading dashes omitted.  This option is meant
more as an escape hatch when scripting or integrating into other systems rather
than used normally.

For example, @samp{--version} and @samp{--do-command version} are equivalent.

@item --environment <user|virtual|operating>
Set running environment.  @xref{Runtime Environments} for more details.

@item -E <B|big|L|little>
@itemx --endian <B|big|L|little>
Set endianness.

Most architectures only support one endianness, so this option isn't that
useful there.

@item --architecture <MACHINE>
Specify the architecture to use.  @xref{Architecture Specifics} for possible
options.  Currently, most builds only include one architecture at a time, and
it's selected by default, so this setting isn't useful there.

@item --architecture-info
@itemx --info-architecture
List supported architectures.

@item --target <bfdname>
Specify the object-code format for input object files.  This is usually handled
automatically for you by the @value{bfd} library which autodetects most formats.

Binary files are a common format that is not handled automatically.  You will
want to use @samp{binary} explicitly in that case.

@item --target-info
@itemx --info-target
List supported @value{bfd} targets.

@item --sysroot <sysroot>
Root for system calls with absolute file-names and the initial @value{cwd}.

@item --argv0 <arg>
Set argv[0] to the specified string.  This overrides the default program name
and can be useful when testing programs that rely on argv[0] for changing its
behavior.
@end table

@node Environment Variables (environ)
@section Environment Variables (environ)
The environment variables exposed to the simulated program is distinct from the
active environment variables the simulator itself has (which in turn tends to be
inherited from its parent, e.g. the user's shell where @code{run} is invoked).

That said, by default, the simulated program's environment variables are also
inherited.  The options below can limit or adjust the set of variables exposed.

How the environment variables are exposed to the simulated program depends
heavily on the @ref{Runtime Environments} used, so refer to those sections for
more details.

@table @option
@item --env-set <variable=value>
Set the @var{variable} in the program's environment to @var{value}.  Any
existing @var{variable} will be overridden.

Environment variables may also be specified, sans @option{--env-set}, on the
command line before the path to the program to run.  This provides a succinct
method for setting multiple environment variables.

@item --env-unset <variable|variable=value>
Unset the @var{variable} in the program's environment.

An extended syntax is supported where the value is unset only if the
@var{value} matches.  For example, if the environment has @samp{FOO=bar}, but
@samp{--env-unset FOO=boo} was used, @samp{FOO} would not be unset.

@item --env-clear
Clear the program's environment.

The environment options stack, so this will clear all previously variables, but
any following @option{--env-set} variables will be retained.
@end table

@node Memory Options
@section Memory
Manage memory settings.

Options are processed in the order specified and operate on the current memory
state.  This allows for building up the memory layout one mapping at a time.

Some of these options are "stateful".  That is, they set implicit arguments
for follow up options rather than doing anything by themselves.  For example,
@samp{--memory-fill 0xff --memory-region 0,0x1000} will set the fill setting
to @samp{0xff} for the @samp{--memory-region} call.

Addresses are usually specified using the @code{[<space>:]<address>[@@<level>]}
syntax.

Sizes are usually specified using the @code{<bytes>[BKMG]} syntax.  Suffixes use
base 2 sizes, not base 10, so @code{K} is a kibibyte (1024), not kilobyte
(1000).  If no suffix is specified, bytes (@code{b}) are used.

@table @option
@item --alignment <strict|nonstrict|forced>
@xref{Memory Alignment} for more details.

@item --load-lma
@itemx --load-vma
Use @abbr{VMA, Virtual Memory Address} or @abbr{LMA, Load Memory Address} (the
default) addresses when loading the inputs.

@item --memory-delete <address|all>
@itemx --delete-memory <address|all>
Delete memory at @var{address}, or @var{all} addresses.

@item --memory-region <address,size[,modulo]>
Add a memory region starting at @var{address} with @var{size} bytes.

A @var{modulo} size specifies that accesses to the region [address ...
address+size] should be mapped onto the sub region [address ... address+modulo].
The @var{modulo} value must be a power of two.

@item --memory-alias <address,size@{,address@}>
Add a memory shadow from one address to another.

@item --memory-size <size>
Add memory at address zero.  The @var{size} is specified in bytes, kibibytes
(KiB) with @code{k} suffix, mebibytes (MiB) with @code{m}, or gibibytes (GiB)
with @code{g} suffix.

@item --memory-fill <value>
Fill subsequently added memory regions.  @var{value} is a single byte (from
@code{0-255}), and may be decimal or hexidecimal.

@item --memory-clear
Clear subsequently added memory regions.  This is equivalent to
@option{--memory-fill 0}.

@item --memory-mapfile <file>
Have the next memory region memory-map @var{file}.  The file is opened for
reading & writing.

If the memory region size is specified, the file must be at least as big as it.
If the memory region size is not declared explicitly, it will be calculated from
the file's size.

@item --memory-info
@itemx --info-memory
List configurable memory regions.  This only shows the basic memory mappings
(e.g. RAM regions).

@item --map-info
List mapped regions.  This displays all types of address mappings and their
read/write/execute status.  For example, this will include hardware device
register mappings.
@end table

@node Memory Alignment
@subsection Alignment
Different architectures have, at different points in their evolution, taken
different approaches to how unaligned memory accesses are handled.  The most
common patterns are supported.

The default behavior depends on the specific architecture backend (which tends
to match the respective hardware), and may be overridden by @option{--alignment}
at runtime.  The @option{--enable-sim-alignment} configure time option will
override both of these if it were specified.  @xref{Configure Simulator Options}
for more details.

The alignment setting is global and affects all memory accesses.  It cannot be
changed on a per-memory region basis.

Possible alignment settings:
@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{strict}: Unaligned accesses cause exceptions.@*
For example, requesting a 32-bit value at address @code{0x2} will fail.

@item @samp{nonstrict}: Unaligned accesses always work.@*
For example, requesting a 32-bit value at address @code{0x2} will work---the
bytes from @code{0x2-0x5} will be read.

@item @samp{forced}: Unaligned addresses are masked before access.@*
For example, requesting a 32-bit value at address @code{0x2} will read the bytes
from @code{0x0-0x3} (since @code{(0x2 & ~3) = 0x0}).
@end itemize

@node Tracing Options
@section Tracing
Note: Not all architecture backends support all tracing categories.

@xref{Configure Simulator Options} for configure-time control over which
categories are available.

@table @option
@item -t[on|off]
@itemx --trace[=on|off]
Trace useful things.  This option must be specified in order for other tracing
options to be useful.

@item --trace-insn[=on|off]
Perform instruction tracing.  This tends to be high-level instruction family.

@item --trace-disasm[=on|off]
Disassemble instructions using the @sc{opcodes} library.  This will produce more
accurate output, but will be slower.  This can be useful when comparing decode
behavior between the simulator and the disassembler.

@item --trace-decode[=on|off]
Trace instruction decoding.  This tends to be for breaking down the instruction
into its component parts.

@item --trace-extract[=on|off]
Trace instruction extraction.  This tends to be for extracting arguments or bit
fields from the instruction.

@item --trace-linenum[=on|off]
Perform line number tracing (implies @option{--trace-insn}).

@item --trace-memory[=on|off]
Trace memory operations.  This covers loads & stores.

@item --trace-alu[=on|off]
Trace @abbr{ALU, Arithmetic Logic Unit} operations.  This tends to be basic
integer math operations.

@item --trace-fpu[=on|off]
Trace @abbr{FPU, Floating Point Unit} operations.  Not all architectures have
FPU's, and ones that implement them in software cannot be traced at this level
(since there are no actual FPU instructions).

@item --trace-vpu[=on|off]
Trace @abbr{VPU, Vector Processing Unit} operations (also known as @abbr{SIMD,
Single Instruction, Multiple Data} operations).  Not all architectures have
VPU's or SIMD instructions, and ones that implement them in software cannot
be traced at this level since there are no actual machine instructions).

@item --trace-branch[=on|off]
Trace branching.  These can be conditional or unconditional branches, jumps,
returns, and exceptions.

@item --trace-semantics[=on|off]
Perform ALU, FPU, VPU, MEMORY, and BRANCH tracing.  Meant as a shortcut for
common set of operations that users are interested in.

@item --trace-model[=on|off]
Include model performance data.

@item --trace-core[=on|off]
Trace core operations.

@item --trace-events[=on|off]
Trace simulator events.

@item --trace-syscall[=on|off]
Trace system calls.

@item --trace-register[=on|off]
Trace cpu register accesses.

@item --trace-debug[=on|off]
Add information useful for debugging the simulator to the tracing output.

@item --trace-file <FILENAME>
Specify tracing output file instead of dumping to stderr.
@end table

@node Debugging Options
@section Debugging
Note: The debugging subsystem is disabled at compile time by default.  You will
have to pass @option{--enable-sim-trace} and @option{--enable-sim-debug}.

Note: Not all architecture backends support all debugging categories.

@table @option
@item -D, --debug
Print debugging messages.  This is required for any of the @option{--debug-*}
options to have any effect.

@item --debug-insn
Print instruction debugging messages.

@item --debug-file <FILENAME>
Specify debugging output file instead of using stderr.
@end table

@node Profiling Options
@section Profiling
Note: Not all architecture backends support all profiling categories.

@table @option
@item -p[on|off]
@itemx --profile[=on|off]
Perform profiling.  This is required for any of the @option{--profile-*}
options to have any effect.

@item --profile-insn[=on|off]
Perform instruction profiling.

@item --profile-memory[=on|off]
Perform memory profiling.

@item --profile-core[=on|off]
Perform CORE profiling.

@item --profile-model[=on|off]
Perform model profiling.

@item --profile-cpu-frequency <CPU FREQUENCY>
Specify the speed of the simulated cpu clock.

@item --profile-file FILENAME
Specify profile output file instead of using stderr.

@item --profile-pc[=on|off]
Perform PC profiling.

@item -F PC PROFILE FREQUENCY
@item --profile-pc-frequency <PC PROFILE FREQUENCY>
Specified PC profiling frequency.

@item -S <PC PROFILE SIZE>
@itemx --profile-pc-size <PC PROFILE SIZE>
Specify PC profiling size.

@item --profile-pc-granularity <PC PROFILE GRANULARITY>
Specify PC profiling sample coverage.

@item --profile-pc-range BASE,BOUND
Specify PC profiling address range.
@end table

@node Watchpoints Options
@section Watchpoints
Note: Not all architecture backends support the same set of watchpoint events
or actions.

A note on terminology: watchpoints and breakpoints tend to be synonymous.  The
GNU Simulator uses the term "watchpoints".  These are effectively "hardware
watchpoints" as they do not require changing the instructions executed (how
"software breakpoints" are implemented).

Watchpoint functionality is mostly meant to be used when integrating with other
systems (for example, @sc{gdb}).  When running the simulator via @command{run},
watchpoints will trigger @code{SIGTRAP} signals which halt the simulation and
cause the program to exit.

@table @option
@item --watch-cycles-ACTION [+]COUNT
Watch the simulator, take ACTION in COUNT cycles (`+' for every COUNT cycles),
ACTION is int breakpoint.

@item --watch-pc-ACTION [!]ADDRESS
Watch the PC, take ACTION when matches ADDRESS (in range ADDRESS,ADDRESS),
`!' negates test.

@item --watch-clock-ACTION [+]MILLISECONDS
Watch the clock, take ACTION after MILLISECONDS (`+' for every MILLISECONDS).

@item --watch-delete IDENT|all|pc|cycles|clock
Delete a watchpoint.

@item --watch-info
List scheduled watchpoints.
@end table

@node Device Models Options
@section Device Models
Note: Not all architecture backends support hardware/device simulation.

@xref{Modeling Hardware} for more details.

@table @option
@item --hw-info
@itemx --info-hw
List configurable hardware regions.

@item --hw-trace[=on|off]
@itemx --trace-hw
Trace all hardware devices.

@item --hw-device <DEVICE>
Add the specified device.  This is used to configure a single device or
component, not an entire system.

@item --hw-list
List the current active device tree.

@item --hw-file FILE
Add the devices listed in the file.

@item --model MODEL
Specify model to simulate.  This is used to select a standard CPU or core
architecture, and all of its associated pieces.  This is a higher level
abstraction than the @option{--hw-device} setting.

Think of this as selecting an entire SoC while @option{--hw-device} controls
individual components or peripherals (for example, a single I2C bus).

@item --model-info
@itemx --info-model
List selectable models.
@end table

@node Serial Socket
@section Serial Ports Over Network Sockets
@table @option
@item --sockser-addr SOCKET ADDRESS
Set serial emulation socket address.
@end table

@node GDB Integration
@section GDB Integration
If the simulator has been enabled and ported to the target, it should be
available while running @sc{gdb} automatically.  This makes for quick testing
and low level debugging starting from the very first instruction.

You can check that the simulator is available by running @code{target sim
--version} in @sc{gdb}.  If it reports @code{Undefined target command: "sim"},
verify that @sc{gdb} has been compiled correctly.

Running via @sc{gdb} has a few caveats and error reporting is terse.  Here's a
quick example.

@smallexample
# First connect to the simulator.
(gdb) target sim [simulator options]

# You won't be able to do anything until you load a program (e.g. ELF).
(gdb) load ./hello.elf

# You then need to actually run the program to get resources (e.g. registers).
# You might want to set some breakpoints before executing things.
(gdb) run

# You can change some simulator settings while running.  Note that the options
# are the same as the command line options, but with no leading dashes.
(gdb) sim help
@end smallexample

@node Runtime Environments
@chapter Runtime Environments
@cartouche
Runtime environments have no relation to environment variables (e.g.
@code{environ}).  They are completely distinct concepts, and anytime those are
discussed, the full term @samp{environment variables} will be used to maintain
clarity.
@end cartouche

The simulator has the concept of environments.  These define how many services
the simulator itself provides (akin to a hypervisor), and how much the program
itself will have to handle.

This is similar to QEMU's user & system modes if you're familiar with those.

Let's look at a quick summary to try and clear up confusion.  These names are
used with the @code{--environment} option.

@table @asis
@item No environment
Only CPU registers and memory (RAM) are available.
@item @code{virtual}
The simulator acts as a hypervisor by handling exceptions (e.g. syscalls), but
the program otherwise runs as if it were in the highest CPU privilege level
available.  This is used to run simple bare-metal programs.
@item @code{user}
The simulator acts as an OS kernel by handling exceptions.  The program runs as
if it were in the lowest CPU privilege level available.  This can be used to run
user (e.g. @value{linux}) programs.
@item @code{operating}
The simulator acts like real hardware.  The program runs as if it were an OS
kernel itself on hardware, so it must handle interrupts, exceptions, devices,
etc... all itself.  This can be used to run a Linux kernel which in turn could
run Linux user programs).
@end table

While all ports support basic ISA simulation (e.g. registers), not all ports
support any or all of the environments.  Be sure to consult the port specific
section of the manual before attempting to use unsupported functionality.

@node Virtual Environment
@section Virtual Environment
The virtual environment provides a quick way of executing bare-metal programs.
The simulator acts as a hypervisor by servicing all exceptions.  Memory is
available, but no interrupts or device models work.  Privileged instructions
behavse as if the CPU is always in the highest level.  Code that would switch
privilege levels is ignored (e.g. nop).

Basic @value{libgloss} system calls will be processed by the simulator.

@node Virtual Environment Variables (environ)
@subsection Environment Variables (environ)
Passing environment variables to the simulated program is supported.  These are
independent of the environment variables that the GNU Simulator itself sees.

The runtime support code (e.g. the @value{crt}, @code{crt0}) is responsible for
reading the environemt settings from the simulator.  Consult the particular
runtime's documentation for more details.  @value{libgloss} is known to only
provide an empty stub.

@node Virtual environ Access
@subsubsection Syscall Access
The environment variables are accessible via the @ref{sys_argv} and
@ref{sys_argvlen} syscalls.  Currently they are not accessible indepenently from
the @ref{Virtual Command Line Arguments (argv)}.

@node Virtual Command Line Arguments (argv)
@subsection Command Line Arguments (argv)
Passing command line options to the simulated program is supported.  These are
independent of the options that the GNU Simulator itself handles.  All arguments
specified after the program will be made available.

In this example, the @code{hello.elf} program will be passed three arguments:
@code{--opt}, @code{abc}, and @code{def}.  The @code{--env virtual} will be
consumed by the GNU Simulator itself to set the execution environment.
@example
$ run --env virtual ./hello.elf --opt abc def
@end example

@node Virtual argv Access
@subsubsection Syscall Access
There are two ways the command line may be accessed.  There's the so-called
"old" and "new" ways.  Both are supported since they're in use by different
@value{libgloss} ports, and at this point, trying to deprecate & remove one set
is not really worth the effort.

Originally, only the "old" set of syscalls existed: @ref{sys_argv} and
@ref{sys_argvlen}.  The process first calls @ref{sys_argvlen} to see how many
bytes are required to store all of the command line arguments and environment
strings, then it allocates that space, then it calls @ref{sys_argv} to copy the
flattened string data into the specified buffer.  Finally, the process has to
scan the NUL delimited strings to count the number of arguments (i.e.
@code{argc}) & build up the array of pointers (i.e. @code{argv} and
@code{environ}).  If the space required is too large (especially if too many
arguments or a large environment are specified), then it's impossible to access
any of the individual elements.  Since this logic typically lives in the early
startup code of the process, that typically would result in an early crash or
abort.

To address the memory limitations, a "new" set of syscalls were added:
@ref{sys_argc}, @ref{sys_argnlen}, and @ref{sys_argn}.  The process calls
@ref{sys_argc} to see how many command line arguments are available, and then
calls @ref{sys_argnlen} on a single argument to get its individual length, and
then calls @ref{sys_argn} to copy the single argument into its buffer.  This
simplifies common startup code a bit, and provides the flexibility of accessing
arguments only if and when they're needed.  There is no support for accessing
environment variables in this scenario though.

All the syscalls may be used in a single execution of course---there is no
limitation in the simulator itself restricting things to a single set at a
time.  It just doesn't normally happen since code is written with a certain
pattern in mind.

The command line arguments and environment variables these syscalls access are
fixed for the entire run.  The simulated program is free to copy state in and
then manage things however it wants, but the simulator itself will never change
the state it makes available via the syscalls.  Consider them the "initial set".

@node Virtual Filesystem
@subsection Filesystem
Access to the real file system is allowed when using related system calls.  The
@option{--sysroot} option allows some control over which parts of the host file
system is actually visible.  By default, the sysroot is set to @file{/}.

File descriptors are not shared directly.  A mapping table is maintained to
translate the file descriptors from the real ones to what the simulated
environment sees.  This avoids leaking file descriptors used by the simulator
itself into the simulated environment, and for cleanly managing conflicting
file descriptors like stdio.

Sockets and other services using file descriptors go through the same table.

@node Virtual Processes
@subsection Processes
The active process settings are exposed to the simulated environment.  This
allows the simulator to access its own @value{pid} via @ref{sys_getpid} so that
it can send itself signals (e.g. via @ref{sys_kill}), as well as send signals to
other processes in the system.

@node Virtual Runtime ABI
@subsection Runtime ABI
When processing system calls, the virtual environment uses the @value{newlib}
ABI by default (e.g., when using the GNU Simulator directly via @command{run}).
However, projects that integrate the simulator directly are able to change these
ABI values to whatever they want.  @xref{Integration} for more details.

This covers a number of items:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Error values (i.e. errno) such as @code{EINVAL}
@item
Signal values such as @code{SIGINT}
@item
Filesystem stat structures such as @code{struct st}
@item
File open constants such as @code{O_RDWR}
@item
System call numbers
@end itemize

The ABI of the simulated program does not need to match the ABI of the host
runtime environment.  The values, flags, structures, etc... are translated on
the fly.  This allows for independence between the simulated program (e.g. its
architecture, bitsize, endianness, etc...) and the host runtime (e.g. its
architecture, bitsize, endianness, etc...).

@node Virtual System Calls
@subsection System Calls
These are the syscalls supported by the virtual environment.  For specific
architecture syscall ABI information, @pxref{Architecture Specifics}.

When using the GNU Simulator directly via @command{run}, these syscalls will
behave as you would expect---by interacting with the current filesystem and
overall OS runtime.  However, projects that integrate the simulator directly
are able to hook every low-level call and choose to take a different action.
@xref{Integration} for more details.

The use of @code{long} in the definitions below is to indicate that arguments
are passed in a single register of native word-size.  So for 32-bit CPUs,
these are 32-bit integers, and in 64-bit CPUs, these are 64-bit integers.

All syscalls have dedicated error values---one register indicates success,
while a different pair holds result values.  This avoids the common problem of
with using a single value to distinguish between success & failure, and the
type of success or failure.  For example, if failure were defined as "negative
values", and the @ref{sys_lseek} syscall was used with large files (4 GiB), the
caller will have difficulty writing checks with 32-bit signed integers.  By
dedicating a register to error status, there is never ambiguity, at the slight
(but perhaps immeasurable) cost of more register usage.

As noted, result values (not including the error status) come in pairs.  This
permits, depending on the syscall, either returning 64-bit values even on a
32-bit CPU (by splitting the value across two registers), or returning two
independent values.

No header file is currently provided to make these syscalls.  These are provided
merely as reference for low-level implementers (e.g. @value{libgloss}
maintainers).  Those environments might provide a raw @code{syscall()} interface
but with a different interface more attuned for use in C or C++ languages (where
returning multiple values can be tricky).

Typographically, the @code{@{...@comma{} ...@}} return value indicates the separate
error and result values.  The error and results are always initialized so
callers can always check the error status before using the result.

@macro defsyscall{ret, name, args, desc, returns, errors, example}
Syscall: @{@i{long error}, @i{\ret\}@} @b{sys_\name\} (@i{\args\})

\desc\

Returns:
@indentedblock
\returns\
@end indentedblock

Errors:
@indentedblock
NB: Exact errors may change based on the host environment.

\errors\
@end indentedblock

Example:
@example
\example\
@end example
@end macro

@node sys_argc
@subsubsection argc
@defsyscall{long, argc, void,
Calculates the number of command line arguments available.,
The number of command line arguments available.  @code{0} is a valid result to
indicate there are no arguments.,
This call will never fail.,
// argv = @{"abc"@comma{} "def"@}
sys_argc()
    @result{} 2

// argv = @{@}
sys_argc()
    @result{} 0
}

See Also:
@indentedblock
Use in conjunction with @ref{sys_argn} & @ref{sys_argnlen}.@*
@b{Not used} with @ref{sys_argvlen} or @ref{sys_argv}.@*
@xref{Virtual argv Access} for more information.
@end indentedblock

@node sys_argnlen
@subsubsection argnlen
@defsyscall{long, argnlen, long @var{argn},
Calculates the length of the command line argument @var{argn}.,
The number of bytes@comma{} not including the trailing @code{NUL}@comma{} of
the command line argument @var{argn}.,
@code{EINVAL}: @var{argn} is less than zero.@*
@code{EINVAL}: @var{argn} is greater or equal to @ref{sys_argc}.@*
,
// argv = @{"blah"@comma{} "abc"@}

sys_argnlen(0)
    @result{} 4

sys_argnlen(1)
    @result{} 3

sys_argnlen(-1)
    @error{} EINVAL

sys_argnlen(100)
    @error{} EINVAL
}

See Also:
@indentedblock
Use in conjunction with @ref{sys_argc} & @ref{sys_argn}.@*
@b{Not used} with @ref{sys_argvlen} or @ref{sys_argv}.@*
@xref{Virtual argv Access} for more information.
@end indentedblock

@node sys_argn
@subsubsection argn

@defsyscall{char *, argn, long @var{argn}@comma{} char *@var{arg},
Copies the command line argument @var{argn} to the @var{arg} buffer.  The caller
must guarantee that @var{arg} is large enough to hold the string;
@ref{sys_argnlen} may be used beforehand.,
The @var{arg} pointer.,
@code{EINVAL}: @var{argn} is less than zero.@*
@code{EINVAL}: @var{argn} is greater or equal to @ref{sys_argc}.@*
@code{EINVAL}: @var{buffer} cannot be written (e.g. address is outside of available address space).@*
,
// argv = @{"blah"@comma{} "abc"@}
// buffer = @{...@}

sys_argn(0@comma{} buffer)
    @result{} buffer
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
      // "blah\0"
      98, 108, 97, 104, 0,
    @}

sys_argn(1@comma{} buffer)
    @result{} buffer
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
      // "abc\0"
      97, 98, 99, 0,
    @}

sys_argn(-1@comma{} buffer)
    @error{} EINVAL

sys_argn(100@comma{} buffer)
    @error{} EINVAL
}

See Also:
@indentedblock
Use in conjunction with @ref{sys_argc} & @ref{sys_argnlen}.@*
@b{Not used} with @ref{sys_argvlen} or @ref{sys_argv}.@*
@xref{Virtual argv Access} for more information.
@end indentedblock

@node sys_argvlen
@subsubsection argvlen
@defsyscall{long, argvlen, void,
Calculates the byte size of all command line arguments and environment strings.
This is the sum of the string length (including the NUL byte) of every command
line argument and environment string@comma{} plus 2 additional @code{NUL} bytes
to mark the end of each segment (1 per segment).,
The total byte size for use with @ref{sys_argv}.,
This call will never fail.,
// argv = @{@}
// environ = @{@}
sys_argvlen()
    @result{} 0 + 1 + 0 + 1
    @result{} 2

// argv = @{"abc"@}
// environ = @{@}
sys_argc()
    @result{} 4 + 1 + 0 + 1
    @result{} 6

// argv = @{"abc"@comma{} "blah"@}
// environ = @{"var=value"@comma{} "HOME=/"@}
sys_argc()
    @result{} (4 + 5) + 1 + (10 + 7) + 1
    @result{} 28
}

See Also:
@indentedblock
Use in conjunction with @ref{sys_argv}.@*
@b{Not used} with @ref{sys_argc}, @ref{sys_argnlen}, or @ref{sys_argn}.@*
@xref{Virtual argv Access} for more information.
@end indentedblock

@node sys_argv
@subsubsection argv
@defsyscall{long @var{argc}@comma{} long @var{envc}, argv, const char *@var{buffer}@comma{} long @var{size},
Copies the command line arguments and environment strings to the @var{buffer}.,
The number of command line arguments @var{argc} and the number of environment
variables @var{envc}.,
@code{EFAULT}: @var{size} is too small to hold all the data.@*
@code{EINVAL}: @var{buffer} cannot be written (e.g. address is outside of available address space).@*
,
// argv = @{@}
// environ = @{@}
// buffer = @{...@}
sys_argvlen(buffer@comma{} 2)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
        // NIL to mark end of argv.
        0@comma{}
        // NIL to mark end of environ.
        0@comma{}
    @}

// argv = @{"abc"@}
// environ = @{@}
// buffer = @{...@}
sys_argvlen(buffer@comma{} 200)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
        // "abc\0"
        97@comma{} 98@comma{} 99@comma{} 0@comma{}
        // NIL to mark end of argv.
        0@comma{}
        // NIL to mark end of environ.
        0@comma{}
    @}

// argv = @{"abc"@comma{} "blah"@}
// environ = @{"var=value"@comma{} "HOME=/"@}
// buffer = @{...@}
sys_argvlen(buffer@comma{} 200)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
        // "abc\0"
        97@comma{} 98@comma{} 99@comma{} 0@comma{}
        // "blah\0"
        98@comma{} 108@comma{} 97@comma{} 104@comma{} 0@comma{}
        // NIL to mark end of argv.
        0@comma{}
        // "var=value\0"
        118@comma{} 97@comma{} 114@comma{} 61@comma{} 118@comma{} 97@comma{} 108@comma{} 117@comma{} 101@comma{} 0@comma{}
        // "HOME=/\0"
        72@comma{} 79@comma{} 77@comma{} 69@comma{} 61@comma{} 47@comma{} 0@comma{}
        // NIL to mark end of environ.
        0@comma{}
    @}
}

See Also:
@indentedblock
Use in conjunction with @ref{sys_argv}.@*
@b{Not used} with @ref{sys_argc}, @ref{sys_argnlen}, or @ref{sys_argn}.@*
@xref{Virtual argv Access} for more information.
@end indentedblock

@node sys_chdir
@subsubsection chdir
@defsyscall{void, chdir, char *@var{path},
Change the working directory to @var{path}.,
@code{0} the @value{cwd} was changed to @var{path}.,
,
// cwd = "/"
sys_chdir("/foo")
    @result{} 0
    @result{} cwd = "/foo"
}

@node sys_chmod
@subsubsection chmod
@defsyscall{void, chmod, const char *@var{path}@comma{} long @var{mode},
Change @var{path}'s permissions to @var{mode}.,
@code{0} if @var{path} had its permissions changed.,
,
// ./foo is 0644 (rw-r--r--)
sys_chmod("foo"@comma{} 0755)
    @result{} ./foo is 0755 (rwxr-xr-x)
}

@node sys_close
@subsubsection close
@defsyscall{void, close, long @var{fd},
Close the open file descriptor @var{fd}.,
@code{0} if @var{fd} was closed.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.,
// 3 is an open file descriptor.
sys_close(3)
    @result{} 0

// 5 is not a valid file descriptor.
sys_close(5)
    @error{} EBADF
}

@node sys_exit
@subsubsection exit
@defsyscall{void, exit, long @var{status},
Halts execution of the simulation.  Typically @code{0} is used to indicate
"success" while non-zero values are "failure".
@*@*
The full value is passed back and made available to the simulator.
However@comma{} when using @command{run}@comma{} the value callers typically see
are still limited by the OS's @posix{functions, exit} call.  Which means the
value is masked by @code{0xff} to get it into the [0@comma{}255] range.,
N/A,
This call will never fail.,
sys_exit(0)
    @result{} The simulation exits with status of 0.

sys_exit(1)
    @result{} The simulation exits with status of 1.
}

@node sys_fstat
@subsubsection fstat
@defsyscall{long, fstat, long @var{fd}@comma{} struct stat *@var{statbuf},
Get the file status for open @var{fd} and store it in @var{statbuf}.,
@code{0} if the file status was stored successfully.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.@*
,
// 4 is a valid file descriptor.
// st is a struct stat.
sys_fstat(4@comma{} &st)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} st = @{
        // The stat structure contains details on the open file.
    @}
}

@node sys_ftruncate
@subsubsection ftruncate
@defsyscall{long, ftruncate, long @var{fd}@comma{} long @var{length},
Truncates the open file @var{fd} to the byte size @var{length}.,
@code{0} if @var{fd} was truncated to @var{length} bytes.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.@*
,
// 4 is a valid file descriptor.
sys_ftruncate(4@comma{} 100)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} The open file's size is now 100 bytes.
}

@node sys_getpid
@subsubsection getpid
@defsyscall{long, getpid, void,
Gets the current process's id (PID).  When using @command{run}@comma{} this is
the actual simulator's process id.,
The process id.,
This call will never fail.,
sys_getpid()
    @result{} 10505  // The process id will probably change between every run.
}

@node sys_kill
@subsubsection kill
@defsyscall{long, kill, long @var{pid}@comma{} long @var{signal},
Send a @var{signal} to the proccess @var{pid}.,
@code{0} if @var{signal} was sent to @var{pid}.,
@code{EINVAL}: An invalid @var{signal} was specified.@*
@code{EPERM}: The process may not send signals to @var{pid}.@*
@code{ESRCH}: Process @var{pid} does not exist.@*
,
// Get the current process's id.
sys_getpid()
    @result{} 42

// Send a SIGINT (i.e. @kbd{@key{CTRL}-c}) to self.
sys_kill(42@comma{} SIGINT)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} The simulator will receive a SIGINT for the process.
}

@node sys_lseek
@subsubsection lseek
@defsyscall{int64_t, lseek, long @var{fd}@comma{} long @var{offset}@comma{} long @var{whence},
Adjust the file offset of the open @var{fd} according to @var{whence}.,
The new file offset.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.@*
,
// 4 is a valid file descriptor.
// Its current offset is 100 with a length of 300 bytes.

sys_lseek(4@comma{} 20@comma{} SEEK_CUR)
    @result{} 120
    @result{} The file offset is now 120.

sys_lseek(4@comma{} -40@comma{} SEEK_CUR)
    @result{} 80
    @result{} The file offset is now 80.

sys_lseek(4@comma{} 0@comma{} SEEK_SET)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} The file offset is now 0.

sys_lseek(4@comma{} -50@comma{} SEEK_END)
    @result{} 250
    @result{} The file offset is now 250.
}

@node sys_lstat
@subsubsection lstat
@defsyscall{long, lstat, const char *@var{path}@comma{} struct stat *@var{statbuf},
Get the file status for the symlink @var{path} and store it in @var{statbuf}.,
@code{0} if the file status was stored successfully.,
@code{ENOENT}: @var{path} does not exist.@*
,
// ./foo is a symlink.
// st is a struct stat.
sys_lstat("foo"@comma{} &st)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} st = @{
        // The stat structure contains details on the symlink ./foo.
    @}
}

@node sys_open
@subsubsection open
@defsyscall{long, open, const char *@var{path}@comma{} long @var{flags}@comma{} long @var{mode},
Open the @var{path} and return the new file descriptor.  The @var{flags} contain
the access mode@comma{} creation flags@comma{} and other file status related
flags.,
The new @var{fd}.,
,
// ./foo is a file.
sys_open("foo"@comma{} O_RDONLY)
    @result{} 3  // The file descriptor may change between runs.

// ./foo is a file.
sys_open("foo"@comma{} O_WRONLY)
    @result{} 3  // The file descriptor may change between runs.

// ./foo does not exist.
sys_open("foo"@comma{} O_RDWR|O_CREAT@comma{} 0644)
    @result{} 3  // The file descriptor may change between runs.
}

@node sys_pipe
@subsubsection pipe
@defsyscall{long, pipe, long @var{fds}[2],
Create a new unidirectional pipe and store the file descriptors in @var{fds}.
@var{fds[0]} is the read end while @var{fds[1]} is the write end.,
@code{0} if the pipe was successfully created.,
,
// long fds[2]
sys_pipe(fds)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} fds[0] and fds[1] are valid file descriptors.
}

@node sys_read
@subsubsection read
@defsyscall{long, read, long @var{fd}@comma{} char *@var{buffer}@comma{} long @var{count},
Read up to @var{count} bytes from @var{fd} and store them in @var{buffer}.,
The number of bytes read.  @code{0} means end of file is reached.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.@*
,
// 4 is a valid file descriptor for a file opened for reading.
// It contains the string "some data".

// buffer = @{...@}
sys_read(4@comma{} buffer@comma{} 4)
    @result{} 4
    @result{} The file offset is now 4.
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
        // "some"
        115, 111, 109, 101,
    @}

sys_read(4@comma{} buffer@comma{} 1000)
    @result{} 5
    @result{} The file offset is now 9.
    @result{} @point{}buffer = @{
        // " data"
        32, 100, 97, 116, 97,
    @}

sys_read(4@comma{} buffer@comma{} 4)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} The file offset is still 9.
}

@node sys_rename
@subsubsection rename
@defsyscall{long, rename, const char *@var{old_path}@comma{} const char *@var{new_path},
Rename the @var{old_path} to @var{new_path}.  @var{new_path} must not exist
already nor may it be a directory.,
@code{0} if the files were renamed correctly.,
@code{EEXIST}: @var{new_path} already exists.@*
@code{ENOENT}: @var{old_path} does not exist.@*
,
// ./foo is a file.  ./bar does not exist.
sys_rename("foo"@comma{} "bar")
    @result{} 0
    @result{} "foo" has been renamed to "bar".
}

@node sys_sbrk
@subsubsection sbrk
@c /*#define sbrk 11 - not currently a system call, but reserved.  */

@node sys_stat
@subsubsection stat
@defsyscall{long, stat, const char *@var{path}@comma{} struct stat *@var{statbuf},
Get the file status for the @var{path} and store it in @var{statbuf}.  If
@var{path} is a symlink@comma{} it is dereferenced first.,
@code{0} if the file status was stored successfully.,
@code{ENOENT}: @var{path} does not exist.@*
,
// ./foo is a path (e.g. file@comma{} directory@comma{} etc...) that exists.
// st is a struct stat.
sys_stat("foo"@comma{} &st)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} st = @{
        // The stat structure contains details on the path ./foo.
    @}
}

@node sys_time
@subsubsection time
@c TODO: Actually make time syscall handle 64-bit.
@defsyscall{int64_t, time, void,
Get the current UNIX time as the number of seconds since the Epoch
(1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC)).  Leap seconds are never included.,
The UNIX timestamp.,
This call will never fail.,
sys_time()
    @result{} 631152000  // 1 Jan 1990
}

@node sys_truncate
@subsubsection truncate
@defsyscall{long, truncate, const char *@var{path}@comma{} long @var{length},
Truncates @var{path} to the byte size @var{length}.,
@code{0} if @var{path} was truncated to @var{length} bytes.,
,
// ./foo is a file.
sys_truncate("foo"@comma{} 100)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} "foo" is now 100 bytes.
}

@node sys_utime
@subsubsection utime
@defsyscall{long, utime, const char *@var{path}@comma{} const int64_t @var{times}[2],
Change @var{path}'s access & modify times.  @var{times[0]} is the access time
while @var{times[1]} is the modify time.  Times are specified as the number of
seconds since the Epoch (1970-01-01 00:00:00 +0000 (UTC)).  Leap seconds are
never included.,
@code{0} if @var{path}'s filesystem times were changed.,
@code{ENOENT}: @var{path} does not exist.@*
,
// ./foo is a file.
// buffer = @{0@comma{} 100@}
sys_utime("foo"@comma{} buffer)
    @result{} 0
    @result{} "foo"'s access time is now 0.
    @result{} "foo"'s modify time is now 100.
}

@node sys_write
@subsubsection write
@defsyscall{long, write, long @var{fd}@comma{} char *@var{buffer}@comma{} long @var{count},
Write @var{count} bytes from @var{buffer} to @var{fd}.,
The number of bytes written.,
@code{EBADF}: @var{fd} is not a valid file descriptor.@*
,
// 4 is a valid file descriptor for a file opened for writing.
// It contains the string "nothing".

// buffer = @{115@comma{} 111@comma{} 109@comma{} 101@}  // "some"
sys_write(4@comma{} buffer@comma{} 4)
    @result{} 4
    @result{} The file offset is now 4.
    @result{} The file contains "someing".

// buffer = @{32@comma{} 100@comma{} 97@comma{} 116@comma{} 97@}  // " data"
sys_write(4@comma{} buffer@comma{} 5)
    @result{} 5
    @result{} The file offset is now 9.
    @result{} The file contains "some data".
}

@node sys_unlink
@subsubsection unlink
@defsyscall{long, unlink, const char *@var{path},
Remove @var{path} from the filesystem.,
@code{0} if @var{path} was successfully removed@comma{} @code{-1} otherwise.,
@code{ENOENT}: @var{path} does not exist.@*
,
// "foo" exists in the current directory.
sys_unlink("foo")
    @result{} 0
    @result{} "foo" no longer exists.

// "foo" no longer exists.
sys_unlink("foo")
    @error{} ENOENT
}

@node User Environment
@section User Environment
Similar to the virtual environment, the user environment makes the simulator act
like an OS kernel by handling exceptions.  Memory is available, but no
interrupts or device models work.  Privileged instructions behave as if the CPU
is always in the lowest level.  Code that requires higher priveleged levels
cause exceptions like real hardware which usually means the program exits.

More featureful system call environments are supported here (e.g.
@value{linux}).  Refer to the @value{man7} for more details.

@node User Environment Variables (environ)
@subsection Environment Variables (environ)
Passing environment variables to the simulated program is supported.  These are
independent of the environment variables that the GNU Simulator itself sees.

The environment variables are passed via the stack like a typical operating
system (e.g. @value{linux}) to the @value{crt}.

@node User Command Line Arguments (argv)
@subsection Command Line Arguments (argv)
Passing command line options to the simulated program is supported.  These are
independent of the options that the GNU Simulator itself handles.  All arguments
specified after the program will be made available.

The arguments are passed via the stack like a typical operating system (e.g.
@value{linux}) to the @value{crt}.

@node User System Calls
@subsection System Calls
Currently, @value{linux} system calls are supported by some architectures.
@xref{Architecture Specifics} for more details.

@node Operating Environment
@section Operating Environment
The operating environment is the most complete for the simulated program and
requires the most effort for the simulator ports.  This is akin to running on
an actual CPU with peripherals: the simulated program has to handle all
exceptions and interrupts and privilege levels itself, and communication with
the outside world is via device models (e.g. serial ports).

This can be used to run real bootloaders or OS kernels which in turn could run
user programs.

@node Operating Environment Variables (environ)
@subsection Environment Variables (environ)
There is no support for passing environment variables into the operating
environment since, conceptually, they don't make much sense.  Bare metal
programs (e.g. bootloaders and kernels) don't usually have a lower level in the
software stack where environment variables would live.

Some programs, like @value{uboot}, have a way of storing persistent
configuration data referred to as an environment, but the structure of it tends
to be highly specific.  In those cases, it's better to instantiate device models
that take the place of real hardware.  For example, @value{uboot} could be
configured to store state in CFI flash, and use the @ref{dv-cfi} model.

@node Operating Command Line Arguments (argv)
@subsection Command Line Arguments (argv)
There is no support for passing command line arguments into the operating
environment since, conceptually, they don't make much sense.  Some programs,
like @value{linux}, have a "command line", but passing that information tends
to be highly ABI specific.

@node Modeling Hardware
@chapter Modeling Hardware
TODO discuss models

@node Common Device Models
@section Device Models
Many peripherals are available.

@node dv-cfi
@subsection cfi
Common Flash Memory Interface (CFI) model.

The flash memory defaults to being erased (all zeros) on every run.  The
@code{file} property can be used for persistent storage.

@subsubsection Properties
@table @code
@item @b{(required)} reg = <address> <size>
Specify the @var{address} (within the parent bus) to attach the flash memory.
The @var{size} controls how much of the flash memory is accessible.

@item @b{(required)} cmdset = <primary; integer> [alt; integer]
The CFI command set to use.  Only @code{1} (Intel) is supported currently.

@item size = <device size>
The flash @var{size} (in bytes).  Defaults to the @var{register size}.

The @var{size} must be a power of 2.

@item width = <8|16|32>
The flash bus @var{width} (in bits).  Defaults to @code{8} bits.

@item write_size = <integer>
The flash maximum @var{write size} (in bytes).

The @var{write size} must be a power of 2.

The values specified are not interpreted and are passed directly through.  So
the default is @code{0} which the CFI standard defines as @samp{not supported}.

@item erase_regions = <number blocks> <block size> [<number blocks> <block size> ...]
Define flash @var{erase regions}.  Defaults to 1 erase region (i.e. can only
erase whole chip).

@item voltage = <vcc min> <vcc max> <vpp min> <vpp max>
Define flash voltage settings.  This is not used directly, but is included in
the CFI query command responses.

The values specified are not interpreted and are passed directly through.  So
the defaults are @code{0 0 0 0} which the CFI standard defines as @samp{0.0V}.

@item timeouts = <typ unit write> <typ buf write> <typ block erase> <typ chip erase> <max unit write> <max buf write> <max block erase> <max chip erase>
Define flash timeout settings.  These are not used directly, but are included in
the CFI query command responses.

The values specified are not interpreted and are passed directly through.  So
the defaults are @code{0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0} which the CFI standard defines as
@samp{typ: 1s, not supported, 1ms, not supported} and @samp{max: 1s, 1ms, 1ms,
not supported}.

@item file = <file> [ro|rw]
Use @var{file} as persistent storage of the flash memory data.  It will be
memory mapped directly.

Access mode defaults to @code{ro} (read-only).
@end table

@node dv-core
@subsection core
The root of the device tree.

The core device, positioned at the root of the device tree appears to its child
devices as a normal device just like every other device in the tree.

Internally it is implemented using a core object.  Requests to attach (or
detach) address spaces are passed to that core object.  Requests to transfer
(DMA) data are reflected back down the device tree using the core_map data
transfer methods.

@subsubsection Examples
@example
# Define the core.
/core
# Attach devices below it.
/core/glue-or@@0x11
/core/glue-or@@0x11/interrupt-ranges 0 2
@end example

@node dv-glue
@subsection glue
Glue to interconnect and test hardware ports.

The glue device provides two functions.  Firstly, it provides a mechanism for
inspecting and driving the port network.  Secondly, it provides a set of boolean
primitives that can be used to apply combinatorial operations to the port
network.

Glue devices have a variable number of big endian @code{output registers}.  Each
register is target-word sized.  The registers can be read and written.

Writing to an output register results in an event being driven (level determined
by the value written) on the devices corresponding output port.

Reading an @code{output register} returns either the last value written or the
most recently computed value (for that register) as a result of an event ariving
on that port (which ever was computed last).

@subsubsection Device types
At present the following device types are available:

@table @code
@item glue
In addition to driving its output interrupt port with any value written to an
interrupt input port is stored in the corresponding @code{output register}.
Such input interrupts, however, are not propogated to an output interrupt port.

@item glue-and
The bit-wise AND of the interrupt inputs is computed and then both stored in
@code{output register} zero and propogated to output interrupt output port zero.

@item glue-or
The bit-wise OR of the interrupt inputs is computed and then both stored in
@code{output register} zero and propogated to output interrupt output port zero.

@item glue-xor
The bit-wise XOR of the interrupt inputs is computed and then both stored in
@code{output register} zero and propogated to output interrupt output port zero.

@c TODO: These are listed in the source, but not actually implemented yet.
@c @item glue-nand
@c @item glue-nor
@c @item glue-not
@end table

@subsubsection Properties

@table @code
@item @b{(required)} reg = <address> <size>
Specify the @var{address} (within the parent bus) that this device is to live.
The address must be 2048 * sizeof (word) (8k in a 32-bit simulation) aligned.

@item interrupt-ranges = <int-number> <range>
If present, this specifies the number of valid interrupt inputs (up to the
maximum of 2048).  By default, @var{int-number} is zero and @var{range} is
determined by the @var{reg size}.
@end table

@subsubsection Ports
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{int@var{N}} (bidirectional):
Both an input and an output port for connecting to ports on other devices.
@end itemize

@subsubsection Examples
Create source, bitwize-and, and sink glue devices.  Since the device at address
@var{0x10000} is of size @var{8} it will have two output interrupt ports.
@example
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue@@0x10000/reg 0x10000 8
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue-and@@0x20000/reg 0x20000 4
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue-and/interrupt-ranges 0 2
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue@@0x30000/reg 0x30000 4
@end example

Wire the two source interrupts to the AND device:
@example
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue@@0x10000 > 0 0 /iobus/glue-and
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue@@0x10000 > 1 1 /iobus/glue-and
@end example

Wire the AND device up to the sink so that the and's output is not left open.
@example
/iobus@@0xf0000000/glue-and > 0 0 /iobus/glue@@0x30000
@end example

With the above configuration, the client program is able to compute a two bit
AND.  For instance the @var{C} stub below prints 1 AND 0.
@example
unsigned *input = (void*)0xf0010000;
unsigned *output = (void*)0xf0030000;
unsigned ans;
input[0] = htonl(1);
input[1] = htonl(0);
ans = ntohl(*output);
write_string("AND is ");
write_int(ans);
write_line();
@end example

@subsubsection Bugs

A future implementation of this device may support multiple interrupt ranges.

Some of the devices listed may not yet be fully implemented.

Additional devices such as a D flip-flop (DFF), an inverter (INV) or a latch
(LAT) may prove useful.

@node dv-pal
@subsection pal
The @abbr{PAL, Privileged Architecture Library} for assorted device junk.

Typical hardware dependant hack.  This device allows the firmware to gain access
to all the things the firmware needs (but the OS doesn't).

@subsubsection Registers
The pal contains the following registers:

@multitable @columnfractions .1 .05 .05 .05 .7
@headitem Name @tab Address @tab Size @tab R/W @tab Description
@item @code{RESET}
@tab @code{0}
@tab 8-bit
@tab write
@tab Halts the simulator.  The value written to the register is used as an
exit status.

@item @code{PROCESSOR ID}
@tab @code{4}
@tab 8-bit
@tab read
@tab Returns the processor identifier (0 .. N-1) of the processor performing
the read.

@item @code{INTERRUPT}
@tab @code{8}
@tab 16-bit
@tab write
@tab This register must be written using a two byte store.  The low byte
(address @code{8}) specifies a port and the upper byte (address @code{9})
specifies the level.  @var{level} is driven on the specified port.  By
convention, the pal's interrupt ports (int0, int1, ...) are wired up to the
corresponding processor's level sensative external interrupt pin.

@item @code{PROCESSOR COUNT}
@tab @code{12}
@tab 8-bit
@tab read
@tab Returns the total number of processors active in the current simulation.

@item @code{TTY INPUT FIFO}
@tab @code{16}
@tab 8-bit
@tab read
@tab Returns the next available character from the pal's tty input port.

@item @code{TTY INPUT STATUS}
@tab @code{20}
@tab 8-bit
@tab read
@tab Nonzero if a character is available in @code{TTY INPUT FIFO}, zero
otherwise.  Reading the register will consume the next character (if
available).

@item @code{TTY OUTPUT FIFO}
@tab @code{24}
@tab 8-bit
@tab write
@tab Queue the character to be written to the pal's tty output port.  It will
be automatically flushed.

@item @code{TTY OUTPUT STATUS}
@tab @code{28}
@tab 8-bit
@tab read
@tab Zero if the @code{TTY OUTPUT FIFO} is empty, nonzero otherwise.

@item @code{COUNDOWN}
@tab @code{32}
@tab 32-bit BE
@tab read/write
@tab The countdown registers provide a non-repeating timed interrupt source.
Writing zero to this register clears the countdown timer.  Writing a non-zero
32-bit big-endian value to this register sets the countdown timer to expire in
@var{value} ticks (ticks is target dependant).  Reading the countdown register
returns the last value written.

@item @code{COUNTDOWN VALUE}
@tab @code{36}
@tab 32-bit BE
@tab read
@tab Reading this 32-bit big-endian register returns the number of ticks
remaining until the countdown timer expires.

@item @code{TIMER}
@tab @code{40}
@tab 32-bit BE
@tab read/write
@tab The timer registers provide a periodic timed interrupt source.  Writing
zero to this register clears the periodic timer.  Writing a 32-bit non-zero
value to this register sets the periodic timer to triger every @var{value} ticks
(ticks is target dependant).  Reading the timer register returns the last value
written.

@item @code{TIMER VALUE}
@tab @code{44}
@tab 32-bit BE
@tab read
@tab Reading this 32-bit big-endian register returns the number of ticks until
the next periodic interrupt.
@end multitable

@itemize @bullet
@item @code{0}: reset register (write, 8bit)
@end itemize

@subsubsection Properties

@table @code
@item @b{(required)} reg = <address> <size>
Specify the address (within the parent bus) that this device is to be located.

@item poll? = <boolean>
If present and true, indicates that the device should poll its input.
@end table

@subsubsection Ports
@itemize @bullet
@item @code{int@var{N}} (output):
Driven as a result of a write to the interrupt-port / interrupt-level register
pair.  @var{N} is valid from @code{0} through @var{number of simulated
processors}.

@item @code{countdown} (output):
Driven whenever the countdown counter reaches zero.

@item @code{timer} (output):
Driven whenever the timer counter reaches zero.
@end itemize

@subsubsection Examples
@c INTERRUPT register write:
@c Eg: A two byte write to address 8 of 0x0102
@c   (big-endian) will result in processor 2's external interrupt pin
@c   being asserted.

@subsubsection Bugs
At present the common simulator framework does not support input polling.

@node dv-sockser
@subsection sockser
A pseudo device model for connecting data streams to network sockets.

@node Architecture Specifics
@chapter Architecture Specifics
The GNU simulator has support for many different ISA's and models.

@lowersections
@include arch-aarch64.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-arm.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-avr.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-bfin.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-bpf.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-cr16.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-cris.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-d10v.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-frv.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-ft32.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-h8300.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-iq2000.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-lm32.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-m32c.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-m32r.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-m68hc11.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-mcore.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-microblaze.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-mips.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-mn10300.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-moxie.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-msp430.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-or1k.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-ppc.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-pru.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-riscv.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-rl78.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-rx.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-sh.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-erc32.texi
@raisesections
@lowersections
@include arch-v850.texi
@raisesections

@node Integration
@chapter Integration
Projects might want to integrate simulation directly without relying on the
external @command{run} program.  The GNU simulator provides a libsim.a library
for precisely this with the API defined in @file{sim/sim.h}.

Multiple simulator instances may be instantiated at a time and operate
independently.  Although not all backends support this correct and still rely
on global state.  They are considered buggy and will be fixed one day.

@node Integration API
@section API
The @file{sim/sim.h} header defines the entry points to the simulator library.

The overall life cycle of a simulator looks something like:
[sim_open -> sim_create_inferior -> sim_load] ->
[sim_resume]
[sim_close]

@node Integration Core API
@subsection Core APIs

@node SIM_DESC
@subsubsection SIM_DESC
Each simulator instance is represented by a @code{SIM_DESC}, often abbreviated
@code{sd}, which is the simulator descriptor.  It is an opaque handle to pass
to the simulator APIs akin to a file descriptor.

@node sim_open
@subsubsection sim_open

@node sim_create_inferior
@subsubsection sim_create_inferior

@node sim_load
@subsubsection sim_load

@node sim_resume
@subsubsection sim_resume

@node sim_close
@subsubsection sim_close

@node sim_stop
@subsubsection sim_stop

@node sim_stop_reason
@subsubsection sim_stop_reason


@node Integration Memory API
@subsection Memory APIs

@node sim_read
@subsubsection sim_read

@node sim_write
@subsubsection sim_write

@node sim_fetch_register
@subsubsection sim_fetch_register

@node sim_store_register
@subsubsection sim_store_register


@node Integration Supplemental API
@subsection Supplemental APIs
These APIs are not needed by most projects.  They provide functionality for
specific use cases.

@node sim_complete_command
@subsubsection sim_complete_command


@node sim_do_command
@subsubsection sim_do_command

@node sim_info
@subsubsection sim_info

@node sim_memory_map
@subsubsection sim_memory_map

@node Integration Callbacks
@section Callbacks
TODO
- syscalls
- stat structs
- errno maps
- signal maps
- open maps
- etc...

@node Reporting Bugs
@chapter Reporting Bugs

Your bug reports play an essential role in making simulations reliable.

Reporting a bug may help you by bringing a solution to your problem, or it may
not.  But in any case the principal function of a bug report is to help the
entire community by making the next version work better.  Bug reports are your
contribution to the maintenance of the simulator.

@node Bug Criteria
@section Have You Found a Bug?
@cindex bug criteria

If you are not sure whether you have found a bug, here are some guidelines:

@itemize @bullet
@cindex fatal signal
@cindex simulator crash
@cindex crash of simulator
@item
If the simulator gets a fatal signal, for any input whatever, that is a bug.
Reliable simulators never crash.

@cindex error on valid input
@item
If @command{as} produces an error message for valid input, that is a bug.

@cindex invalid input
@item
If @command{as} does not produce an error message for invalid input, that
is a bug.  However, you should note that your idea of ``invalid input'' might
be our idea of ``an extension'' or ``support for traditional practice''.

@item
If you are an experienced user of simulators, your suggestions for improvement
of @command{as} are welcome in any case.
@end itemize

@node Bug Reporting
@section How to Report Bugs
@cindex bug reports
@cindex simulator bugs, reporting

A number of companies and individuals offer support for @sc{gnu} products.  If
you obtained @command{as} from a support organization, we recommend you
contact that organization first.

You can find contact information for many support companies and
individuals in the file @file{etc/SERVICE} in the @sc{gnu} Emacs
distribution.

@ifset BUGURL
In any event, we also recommend that you send bug reports for @command{as}
to @value{BUGURL}.
@end ifset

The fundamental principle of reporting bugs usefully is this:
@strong{report all the facts}.  If you are not sure whether to state a
fact or leave it out, state it!

Often people omit facts because they think they know what causes the problem
and assume that some details do not matter.  Thus, you might assume that the
name of a symbol you use in an example does not matter.  Well, probably it does
not, but one cannot be sure.  Perhaps the bug is a stray memory reference which
happens to fetch from the location where that name is stored in memory;
perhaps, if the name were different, the contents of that location would fool
the simulator into doing the right thing despite the bug.  Play it safe and
give a specific, complete example.  That is the easiest thing for you to do,
and the most helpful.

Keep in mind that the purpose of a bug report is to enable us to fix the bug if
it is new to us.  Therefore, always write your bug reports on the assumption
that the bug has not been reported previously.

Sometimes people give a few sketchy facts and ask, ``Does this ring a
bell?''  This cannot help us fix a bug, so it is basically useless.  We
respond by asking for enough details to enable us to investigate.
You might as well expedite matters by sending them to begin with.

To enable us to fix the bug, you should include all these things:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The version of @command{as}.  @command{as} announces it if you start
it with the @samp{--version} argument.

Without this, we will not know whether there is any point in looking for
the bug in the current version of @command{as}.

@item
Any patches you may have applied to the @command{as} source.

@item
The type of machine you are using, and the operating system name and
version number.

@item
What compiler (and its version) was used to compile @command{as}---e.g.
``@code{gcc-2.7}''.

@item
The command arguments you gave the simulator to assemble your example and
observe the bug.  To guarantee you will not omit something important, list them
all.  A copy of the Makefile (or the output from make) is sufficient.

If we were to try to guess the arguments, we would probably guess wrong
and then we might not encounter the bug.

@item
A complete input file that will reproduce the bug.  If the bug is observed when
the simulator is invoked via a compiler, send the simulator source, not the
high level language source.  Most compilers will produce the simulator source
when run with the @samp{-S} option.  If you are using @code{GCC}, use
the options @samp{-v --save-temps}; this will save the simulator source in a
file with an extension of @file{.s}, and also show you exactly how
@command{as} is being run.

@item
A description of what behavior you observe that you believe is
incorrect.  For example, ``It gets a fatal signal.''

Of course, if the bug is that @command{as} gets a fatal signal, then we
will certainly notice it.  But if the bug is incorrect output, we might not
notice unless it is glaringly wrong.  You might as well not give us a chance to
make a mistake.

Even if the problem you experience is a fatal signal, you should still say so
explicitly.  Suppose something strange is going on, such as, your copy of
@command{as} is out of sync, or you have encountered a bug in the C
library on your system.  (This has happened!)  Your copy might crash and ours
would not.  If you told us to expect a crash, then when ours fails to crash, we
would know that the bug was not happening for us.  If you had not told us to
expect a crash, then we would not be able to draw any conclusion from our
observations.

@item
If you wish to suggest changes to the @command{as} source, send us context
diffs, as generated by @code{diff} with the @samp{-u}, @samp{-c}, or @samp{-p}
option.  Always send diffs from the old file to the new file.  If you even
discuss something in the @command{as} source, refer to it by context, not
by line number.

The line numbers in our development sources will not match those in your
sources.  Your line numbers would convey no useful information to us.
@end itemize

Here are some things that are not necessary:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A description of the envelope of the bug.

Often people who encounter a bug spend a lot of time investigating
which changes to the input file will make the bug go away and which
changes will not affect it.

This is often time consuming and not very useful, because the way we
will find the bug is by running a single example under the debugger
with breakpoints, not by pure deduction from a series of examples.
We recommend that you save your time for something else.

Of course, if you can find a simpler example to report @emph{instead}
of the original one, that is a convenience for us.  Errors in the
output will be easier to spot, running under the debugger will take
less time, and so on.

However, simplification is not vital; if you do not want to do this,
report the bug anyway and send us the entire test case you used.

@item
A patch for the bug.

A patch for the bug does help us if it is a good one.  But do not omit
the necessary information, such as the test case, on the assumption that
a patch is all we need.  We might see problems with your patch and decide
to fix the problem another way, or we might not understand it at all.

Sometimes with a program as complicated as @command{as} it is very hard to
construct an example that will make the program follow a certain path through
the code.  If you do not send us the example, we will not be able to construct
one, so we will not be able to verify that the bug is fixed.

And if we cannot understand what bug you are trying to fix, or why your
patch should be an improvement, we will not install it.  A test case will
help us to understand.

@item
A guess about what the bug is or what it depends on.

Such guesses are usually wrong.  Even we cannot guess right about such
things without first using the debugger to find the facts.
@end itemize

@node Acknowledgements
@unnumbered Acknowledgements

If you have contributed and your name isn't listed here, it is not meant as a
slight.  We just don't know about it.  File a bug for us, and we'll correct the
situation.

@c List everyone (sorted).
@author Ben Elliston
@author Frank Ch. Eigler
@author Andrew Burgess
@author Mike Frysinger

@c TODO: Fill in maintainers & a bit of history.

@node Installing
@appendix Installing
@cindex installation

@node Requirements
@section Requirements for building
@cindex building, requirements for

Building requires various tools and packages to be available.
Other packages will be used only if they are found.

@heading Necessary Tools/Packages for Building
@table @asis
@item C11 compiler
The GNU Simulator is written in C11.  It should be buildable with any
recent C11 compiler, e.g.@: GCC.

@end table

@heading Optional Tools/Packages for Building
@table @asis
@item SDL
@anchor{SDL}
The Simple DirectMedia Layer (SDL) may be utilized if available.  This library
may be included with your operating system distribution; if it is not, you can
get the latest version from @url{https://www.libsdl.org/}.
The @file{configure} script will search for this library in several standard
locations; if it is installed in an unusual path, you can use the
@option{SDL_CFLAGS} and @option{SDL_LIBS} options to specify the compiler &
linker settings.

The library will not be linked directly.  Instead, it will be loaded dynamically
(via @code{dlopen}) at runtime.  This allows building with support for SDL, but
not actually requiring it if the features aren't used.

SDL 1 & SDL 2 are supported, but the version is fixed at build time.

SDL is used for:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Emulating framebuffer graphics
(@pxref{bfin_ppi} & @pxref{bfin_eppi})
@end itemize
@end table

@node Running Configure
@section Invoking the @file{configure} Script
@cindex configuring
Releases include a @file{configure} script that automates the process of
preparing the simulator for installation; you can then use @code{make} to build
the @code{run} program.
@iftex
@c irrelevant in info file; it's as current as the code it lives with.
@footnote{If you have a more recent simulator version than @value{VERSION},
look at the @file{README} file in the sources; we may have improved the
installation procedures since publishing this manual.}
@end iftex

The distribution includes all the source code you need in a single directory,
whose name is usually composed by appending the version number to @samp{gdb}.
That directory contains:

@table @code
@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/configure @r{(and supporting files)}
script for configuring everything

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/sim/
the source specific to the simulator itself

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/gdb/
the source specific to @sc{gdb} itself

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/bfd/
source for the Binary File Descriptor library

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/include/
@sc{gnu} include files

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/libiberty/
source for the @samp{-liberty} free software library

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/opcodes/
source for the library of opcode tables and disassemblers

@item gdb-@value{VERSION}/readline/
source for the @sc{gnu} command-line interface
@end table

There may be other subdirectories as well.

The simplest way to configure and build is to run @file{configure}
from the @file{gdb-@var{version-number}} source directory, which in
this example is the @file{gdb-@value{VERSION}} directory.

First switch to the @file{gdb-@var{version-number}} source directory
if you are not already in it; then run @file{configure}.  Pass the
identifier for the platform on which the simulator will run as an
argument.

For example:

@smallexample
cd gdb-@value{VERSION}
./configure
make
@end smallexample

Running @samp{configure} and then running @code{make} builds the
included supporting libraries, then @code{gdb} itself.  The configured
source files, and the binaries, are left in the corresponding source
directories.

@need 750
@file{configure} is a Bourne-shell (@code{/bin/sh}) script; if your
system does not recognize this automatically when you run a different
shell, you may need to run @code{sh} on it explicitly:

@smallexample
sh configure
@end smallexample

You should run the @file{configure} script from the top directory in the
source tree, the @file{gdb-@var{version-number}} directory.  If you run
@file{configure} from one of the subdirectories, you will configure only
that subdirectory.  That is usually not what you want.  In particular,
if you run the first @file{configure} from the @file{gdb} subdirectory
of the @file{gdb-@var{version-number}} directory, you will omit the
configuration of @file{bfd}, @file{readline}, and other sibling
directories of the @file{gdb} subdirectory.  This leads to build errors
about missing include files such as @file{bfd/bfd.h}.

You can install @code{run} anywhere.  The best way to do this
is to pass the @code{--prefix} option to @code{configure}, and then
install it with @code{make install}.

@node Separate Objdir
@section Compiling in Another Directory

If you want to run simulator versions for several host or target machines,
you need a different @code{run} compiled for each combination of
host and target.  @file{configure} is designed to make this easy by
allowing you to generate each configuration in a separate subdirectory,
rather than in the source directory.  If your @code{make} program
handles the @samp{VPATH} feature (@sc{gnu} @code{make} does), running
@code{make} in each of these directories builds the @code{gdb}
program specified there.

To build @code{gdb} in a separate directory, run @file{configure}
with the @samp{--srcdir} option to specify where to find the source.
(You also need to specify a path to find @file{configure}
itself from your working directory.  If the path to @file{configure}
would be the same as the argument to @samp{--srcdir}, you can leave out
the @samp{--srcdir} option; it is assumed.)

For example, with version @value{VERSION}, you can build in a separate directory
for a Sun 4 like this:

@smallexample
@group
cd gdb-@value{VERSION}
mkdir ../gdb-sun4
cd ../gdb-sun4
../gdb-@value{VERSION}/configure
make
@end group
@end smallexample

When @file{configure} builds a configuration using a remote source
directory, it creates a tree for the binaries with the same structure
(and using the same names) as the tree under the source directory.  In
the example, you'd find the Sun 4 library @file{libiberty.a} in the
directory @file{gdb-sun4/libiberty}, and @code{run} itself in
@file{gdb-sun4/sim/@var{arch}/g}.

Make sure that your path to the @file{configure} script has just one instance
of @file{gdb} in it.  If your path to @file{configure} looks like
@file{../gdb-@value{VERSION}/sim/configure}, you are configuring only one
subdirectory, not the whole package.  This leads to build errors about missing
include files such as @file{bfd/bfd.h}.

One popular reason to build several configurations in separate directories is to
configure for cross-compiling (where the simulator runs on one machine---the
@dfn{host}---while debugging programs that are compiled for another
machine---the @dfn{target}).  You specify a cross-debugging target by giving the
@samp{--target=@var{target}} option to @file{configure}.

When you run @code{make} to build a program or library, you must run it in a
configured directory---whatever directory you were in when you called
@file{configure} (or one of its subdirectories).

The @code{Makefile} that @file{configure} generates in each source directory
also runs recursively.  If you type @code{make} in a source directory such as
@file{gdb-@value{VERSION}} (or in a separate configured directory configured
with @samp{--srcdir=@var{dirname}/gdb-@value{VERSION}}), you will build all
the required libraries, and then build the simulator.

When you have multiple hosts or targets configured in separate directories, you
can run @code{make} on them in parallel (for example, if they are NFS-mounted on
each of the hosts); they will not interfere with each other.

@node Config Names
@section Specifying Names for Hosts and Targets

The specifications used for hosts and targets in the @file{configure} script are
based on a three-part naming scheme, but some short predefined aliases are also
supported.  The full naming scheme encodes three pieces of information in the
following pattern:

@smallexample
@var{architecture}-@var{vendor}-@var{os}
@end smallexample

For example, you can use the alias @code{sun4} as a @var{host} argument, or as
the value for @var{target} in a @code{--target=@var{target}} option.  The
equivalent full name is @samp{sparc-sun-sunos4}.

The @file{configure} script does not provide any query facility to list all
supported host and target names or aliases.  @file{configure} calls the Bourne
shell script @code{config.sub} to map abbreviations to full names; you can read
the script, if you wish, or you can use it to test your guesses on
abbreviations---for example:

@smallexample
% sh config.sub i386-linux
i386-pc-linux-gnu
% sh config.sub alpha-linux
alpha-unknown-linux-gnu
% sh config.sub hp9k700
hppa1.1-hp-hpux
% sh config.sub sun4
sparc-sun-sunos4.1.1
% sh config.sub sun3
m68k-sun-sunos4.1.1
% sh config.sub i986v
Invalid configuration `i986v': machine `i986v' not recognized
@end smallexample

@noindent
@code{config.sub} is also distributed in the source directory.

@node Configure Options
@section @file{configure} Options

Here is a summary of the @file{configure} options and arguments that are most
often useful when building.  @file{configure} also has several other options
not listed here.  @xref{Running configure Scripts,,,autoconf}, for a full
explanation of @file{configure}.

@smallexample
configure @r{[}--help@r{]}
          @r{[}--prefix=@var{dir}@r{]}
          @r{[}--exec-prefix=@var{dir}@r{]}
          @r{[}--srcdir=@var{dirname}@r{]}
          @r{[}--target=@var{target}@r{]}
@end smallexample

@noindent
You may introduce options with a single @samp{-} rather than
@samp{--} if you prefer; but you may abbreviate option names if you use
@samp{--}.

@node Configure Common Options
@subsection Common Options
These are the generic configure options that apply to all projects and are
frequently useful to people building from source.

@table @option
@item --help
Display a quick summary of how to invoke @file{configure}.

@item --prefix=@var{dir}
Configure the source to install programs and files under directory
@file{@var{dir}}.

@item --exec-prefix=@var{dir}
Configure the source to install programs under directory
@file{@var{dir}}.

@c avoid splitting the warning from the explanation:
@need 2000
@item --srcdir=@var{dirname}
Use this option to make configurations in directories separate from the source
directories.  Among other things, you can use this to build (or maintain)
several configurations simultaneously, in separate directories.
@file{configure} writes configuration-specific files in the current directory,
but arranges for them to use the source in the directory @var{dirname}.
@file{configure} creates directories under the working directory in parallel to
the source directories below @var{dirname}.

@item --target=@var{target}
Configure for cross-debugging programs running on the specified @var{target}.
Without this option, the simulator is configured to debug programs that run on
the same machine (@var{host}) as the simulator itself.

There is no convenient way to generate a list of all available targets.  Also
see the @code{--enable-targets} option, below.

@item --enable-targets=@r{[}@var{target}@r{]}@dots{}
@itemx --enable-targets=all
Configure for cross-debugging programs running on the specified list of targets.
The special value @samp{all} configures for debugging programs running on any
target it supports.

@item --with-relocated-sources=@var{dir}
Sets up the default source path substitution rule so that directory names
recorded in debug information will be automatically adjusted for any directory
under @var{dir}.  @var{dir} should be a subdirectory of the configured prefix,
the one mentioned in the @code{--prefix} or @code{--exec-prefix} options to
configure.  This option is useful if installing to a different place after it
is built.

@item --enable-64-bit-bfd
Enable 64-bit support in BFD on 32-bit hosts.

@item --with-sysroot=@var{dir}
Use @var{dir} as the default system root directory for libraries whose file
names begin with @file{/lib}' or @file{/usr/lib'}.  (The value of @var{dir} can
be modified at run time by using the @command{--sysroot} option.)  If @var{dir}
is under the configured prefix (set with @code{--prefix} or @code{--exec-prefix
options}, the default system root will be automatically adjusted if and when
everything is moved to a different location.

@end table

@node Configure Simulator Options
@subsection Simulator Options
These are the GNU Simulator specific options.  None of them are required to get
a working build---many options can already be controlled at runtime instead.
These are provided to help fine tune overall execution in case you need to shave
off a bit of execution time.

@table @option
@item --enable-sim
Enable or disable the GNU Simulator specifically.

@item --enable-sim-alignment=@var{align}
Force the @ref{Memory Alignment} behavior.  This will always override the
runtime selections.

@item --enable-sim-assert
Whether to enable extra internal asserts that keep track of general health of
simulator runtime and its data structures.  These can be helpful when tracking
down bugs, but are not required for correct functioning, and can provide a minor
speed boost when they're disabled.

@item --enable-sim-endian=@var{endian}
Force the target byte endian orientation.  This will always override the runtime
selections.

The default depends on the specific architecture backend (which tends to match
the hardware, and @ref{Config Names}), and may be overridden by
@option{--endian}.

Possible @var{endian} settings:
@itemize @bullet
@item @samp{big}: Big byte endian orientation.
@item @samp{little}: Little byte endian orientation.
@end itemize

@item --enable-sim-environment=@var{environment}
Force one of the @ref{Runtime Environments}.  This will always override the
runtime selections.

@item --enable-sim-hardware
Whether to enable hardware/device simulation.  This is normally enabled as it
doesn't incur runtime overhead unless devices are actually used.

@item --enable-sim-inline=@var{inlines}
A comma separated list of which sim modules should be inlined.  By default, no
modules are inlined.

This often will greatly increase the code size of the program, but may increase
the speed at the same time.

Specifying @samp{yes} will inline all modules.

@item --enable-sim-profile=opts
A comma separated list of which profile subsystems to support.  By default, all
subsystems are enabled except for debug.

@xref{Profiling Options} for available subsystem names.

@item --enable-sim-reserved-bits
Specify whether to check reserved bits in instruction.

This option should not be specified by most users.

@item --enable-sim-scache=@var{size}
@i{Only for backends using @value{cgen}.}

The size (in bytes) of the semantic cache.  The default is 16384 (16KiB).

@item --enable-sim-stdio
Whether input/output is routed through callbacks to the C library stdio layers
(the default), or directly to the underlying file descriptors.  Most people will
never change this.

@item --enable-sim-trace=@var{opts}
A comma separated list of which trace subsystems to support.  The default is all
subsystems except for debug (see @option{--enable-sim-debug} for more info).

@xref{Tracing Options} for available subsystem names.

@item --enable-sim-frv-trapdump
@i{For the @ref{FRV} architecture only.}

Make unknown traps dump CPU registers for easier debugging.

@item --disable-sim-rx-cycle-accurate
@i{For the @ref{RX} architecture only.}

Disable cycle accurate simulation which speeds up overall runtime.  If you
don't need cycle accuracy (e.g. for performance tuning), then you should turn
this option off.

@end table

@node Configure Developer Options
@subsection Developer Options
These are largely meant for developers of the GNU Simulator itself.

@table @option
@item --enable-build-warnings
When building the sources, ask the compiler to warn about any code which looks
even vaguely suspicious.  It passes many different warning flags, depending on
the exact version of the compiler you are using.

This option applies to all projects in the source tree, not just the simulator.

@item --enable-sim-build-warnings
When building the simulator sources, ask the compiler to warn about any code
which looks even vaguely suspicious.  It passes many different warning flags,
depending on the exact version of the compiler you are using.

This option applies only to the simulator.  It allows building all the other
projects with one set of warnings, but the simulator with a different set.

@item --enable-werror
Treat compiler warnings as errors.  It adds the @code{-Werror} flag
to the compiler, which will fail the compilation if the compiler
outputs any warning messages.

@item --enable-example-sims
Enable example simulator backends.  If your target does not have an architecture
backend, these will provide simple toy CPUs for reference.  Useful when porting
to a new architecture.

@item --enable-maintainer-mode
Enable build rules and dependencies only useful to simulator developers.  For
example, turn on automatic regeneration of build scripts and source files.
These are often expensive operations and require additional tools.

@item --enable-cgen-maint=@var{dir}
Enable build rules and dependencies, specific to @value{cgen}, only useful to
simulator developers.  If you're working on an architecture backend that uses
@value{cgen}, then this is a necessity.

Normally @value{cgen} will be checked out in the top level of the source tree
(alongside the @file{sim/} directory).  The optional @var{dir} setting allows
specifying any path to the @value{cgen} source tree.

@item --enable-sim-debug=opts
A comma separated list of which debug subsystems to support.  By default, none
are enabled.  This setting first requires that @code{debug} be enabled with the
@option{--enable-sim-trace} option.

@xref{Debugging Options} for available subsystem names.
@end table

@node Newlib ABI
@appendix Newlib ABI
These are the ABI constants & structures that @value{newlib} uses.  They are
autogenerated from the @value{newlib} source tree.

@node Newlib ABI Errno
@section Errno Values
@include abi-newlib-errno.texi

@node Newlib ABI Signal Numbers
@section Signal Numbers
@include abi-newlib-signal.texi

@node Newlib ABI Open Flags
@section Open Flags
@include abi-newlib-open.texi

@node Newlib ABI Syscalls
@section Syscall Numbers
@include abi-newlib-sys.texi

@node Porting
@appendix Porting
Porting the GNU Simulator to a new architecture can be fun!

This information is maintained in the wiki.@*
@url{https://sourceware.org/gdb/wiki/Sim/Porting}

Documentation is maintained only for the latest source tree, not for releases.
If you need to work on an old release, the source is probably your best bet.

@node Internals
@appendix Internals
Adding new features to the GNU Simulator can be fun!

This information is maintained in the wiki.@*
@url{https://sourceware.org/gdb/wiki/Sim/Internals}

Documentation is maintained only for the latest source tree, not for releases.
If you need to work on an old release, the source is probably your best bet.

@c todo discuss CGEN
@c todo discuss IGEN

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl.texi

@c To avoid filename clashes between index.html and Index.html on systems with
@c case-insentivie filesystems, we avoid the chapter name "Index".

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp

@node Syscall Index
@unnumbered Syscall Index
@printindex sc

@node Device Model Index
@unnumbered Device Model Index
@printindex dv

@node Public API Index
@unnumbered Public API Index
@printindex fn

@bye
