@c Copyright (C) 2019-2023 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.

@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node BPF-Dependent
@chapter BPF Dependent Features
@end ifset

@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter BPF Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@cindex BPF support
@menu
* BPF Options::                 BPF specific command-line options.
* BPF Special Characters::      Comments and statements.
* BPF Registers::               Register names.
* BPF Directives::		Machine directives.
* BPF Instructions::            Machine instructions.
@end menu

@node BPF Options
@section BPF Options
@cindex BPF options (none)
@cindex options for BPF (none)

@c man begin OPTIONS
@table @gcctabopt

@cindex @option{-EB} command-line option, BPF
@item -EB
This option specifies that the assembler should emit big-endian eBPF.

@cindex @option{-EL} command-line option, BPF
@item -EL
This option specifies that the assembler should emit little-endian
eBPF.

@cindex @option{-mdialect} command-line options, BPF
@item -mdialect=@var{dialect}
This option specifies the assembly language dialect to recognize while
assembling.  The assembler supports @option{normal} and
@option{pseudoc}.

@cindex @option{-misa-spec} command-line options, BPF
@item -misa-spec=@var{spec}
This option specifies the version of the BPF instruction set to use
when assembling.  The BPF ISA versions supported are @option{v1} @option{v2}, @option{v3} and @option{v4}.

The value @option{xbpf} can be specified to recognize extra
instructions that are used by GCC for testing purposes.  But beware
this is not valid BPF.
@end table

Note that if no endianness option is specified in the command line,
the host endianness is used.
@c man end

@node BPF Special Characters
@section BPF Special Characters

@cindex line comment character, BPF
@cindex BPF line comment character
The presence of a @samp{;} on a line indicates the start of a comment
that extends to the end of the current line.  If a @samp{#} appears as
the first character of a line, the whole line is treated as a comment.

@cindex statement separator, BPF
Statements and assembly directives are separated by newlines.

@node BPF Registers
@section BPF Registers

@cindex BPF register names
@cindex register names, BPF
The eBPF processor provides ten general-purpose 64-bit registers,
which are read-write, and a read-only frame pointer register:

@noindent
In normal syntax:

@table @samp
@item %r0 .. %r9
General-purpose registers.
@item %r10
@itemx %fp
Read-only frame pointer register.
@end table

All BPF registers are 64-bit long.  However, in the Pseudo-C syntax
registers can be referred using different names, which actually
reflect the kind of instruction they appear on:

@noindent
In pseudoc syntax:

@table @samp
@item r0..r9
General-purpose register in an instruction that operates on its value
as if it was a 64-bit value.
@item w0..w9
General-purpose register in an instruction that operates on its value
as if it was a 32-bit value.
@item r10
Read-only frame pointer register.
@end table

@noindent
Note that in the Pseudo-C syntax register names are not preceded by
@code{%} characters.

@node BPF Directives
@section BPF Directives

@cindex machine directives, BPF

The BPF version of @code{@value{AS}} supports the following additional
machine directives:

@table @code
@cindex @code{half} directive, BPF
@item .word
The @code{.half} directive produces a 16 bit value.

@cindex @code{word} directive, BPF
@item .word
The @code{.word} directive produces a 32 bit value.

@cindex @code{dword} directive, BPF
@item .dword
The @code{.dword} directive produces a 64 bit value.
@end table

@node BPF Instructions
@section BPF Instructions

@cindex BPF opcodes
@cindex opcodes for BPF
In the instruction descriptions below the following field descriptors
are used:

@table @code
@item rd
Destination general-purpose register whose role is to be the
destination of an operation.
@item rs
Source general-purpose register whose role is to be the source of an
operation.
@item disp16
16-bit signed PC-relative offset, measured in number of 64-bit words,
minus one.
@item disp32
32-bit signed PC-relative offset, measured in number of 64-bit words,
minus one.
@item offset16
Signed 16-bit immediate representing an offset in bytes.
@item disp16
Signed 16-bit immediate representing a displacement to a target,
measured in number of 64-bit words @emph{minus one}.
@item disp32
Signed 32-bit immediate representing a displacement to a target,
measured in number of 64-bit words @emph{minus one}.
@item imm32
Signed 32-bit immediate.
@item imm64
Signed 64-bit immediate.
@end table

@subsection Arithmetic instructions

The destination register in these instructions act like an
accumulator.

Note that in pseudoc syntax these instructions should use @code{r}
registers.

@table @code
@item add rd, rs
@itemx add rd, imm32
@itemx rd += rs
@itemx rd += imm32
64-bit arithmetic addition.

@item sub rd, rs
@itemx sub rd, rs
@itemx rd -= rs
@itemx rd -= imm32
64-bit arithmetic subtraction.

@item mul rd, rs
@itemx mul rd, imm32
@itemx rd *= rs
@itemx rd *= imm32
64-bit arithmetic multiplication.

@item div rd, rs
@itemx div rd, imm32
@itemx rd /= rs
@itemx rd /= imm32
64-bit arithmetic integer division.

@item mod rd, rs
@itemx mod rd, imm32
@itemx rd %= rs
@itemx rd %= imm32
64-bit integer remainder.

@item and rd, rs
@itemx and rd, imm32
@itemx rd &= rs
@itemx rd &= imm32
64-bit bit-wise ``and'' operation.

@item or rd, rs
@itemx or rd, imm32
@itemx rd |= rs
@itemx rd |= imm32
64-bit bit-wise ``or'' operation.

@item xor rd, imm32
@itemx xor rd, rs
@itemx rd ^= rs
@itemx rd ^= imm32
64-bit bit-wise exclusive-or operation.

@item lsh rd, rs
@itemx ldh rd, imm32
@itemx rd <<= rs
@itemx rd <<= imm32
64-bit left shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item rsh %d, %s
@itemx rsh rd, imm32
@itemx rd >>= rs
@itemx rd >>= imm32
64-bit right logical shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item arsh rd, rs
@itemx arsh rd, imm32
@itemx rd s>>= rs
@itemx rd s>>= imm32
64-bit right arithmetic shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item neg rd, rs
@itemx neg rd, imm32
@itemx rd = - rs
@itemx rd = - imm32
64-bit arithmetic negation.

Note that in the @code{rd = - imm32} syntax there must be at least
one white space between @code{-} and @code{imm32}.  Otherwise the
instruction is parsed as a @code{mov rd, imm32} instruction with a
negative 32-bit immediate.  This is a consequence of a syntactic
ambiguity in the pseudoc syntax.

@item mov rd, rs
@itemx mov rd, imm32
@itemx rd = rs
@itemx rd = imm32
Move the 64-bit value of @code{rs} in @code{rd}, or load @code{imm32}
in @code{rd}.

@item movs rd, rs, 8
@itemx rd = (s8) rs
Move the sign-extended 8-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.

@item movs rd, rs, 16
@itemx rd = (s16) rs
Move the sign-extended 16-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.

@item movs rd, rs, 32
@itemx rd = (s32) rs
Move the sign-extended 32-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.
@end table

@subsection 32-bit arithmetic instructions

The destination register in these instructions act as an accumulator.

Note that in pseudoc syntax these instructions should use @code{w}
registers.  It is not allowed to mix @code{w} and @code{r} registers
in the same instruction.

@table @code
@item add32 rd, rs
@itemx add32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd += rs
@itemx rd += imm32
32-bit arithmetic addition.

@item sub32 rd, rs
@itemx sub32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd -= rs
@itemx rd += imm32
32-bit arithmetic subtraction.

@item mul32 rd, rs
@itemx mul32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd *= rs
@itemx rd *= imm32
32-bit arithmetic multiplication.

@item div32 rd, rs
@itemx div32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd /= rs
@itemx rd /= imm32
32-bit arithmetic integer division.

@item mod32 rd, rs
@itemx mod32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd %= rs
@itemx rd %= imm32
32-bit integer remainder.

@item and32 rd, rs
@itemx and32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd &= rs
@itemx rd &= imm32
32-bit bit-wise ``and'' operation.

@item or32 rd, rs
@itemx or32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd |= rs
@itemx rd |= imm32
32-bit bit-wise ``or'' operation.

@item xor32 rd, rs
@itemx xor32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd ^= rs
@itemx rd ^= imm32
32-bit bit-wise exclusive-or operation.

@item lsh32 rd, rs
@itemx lsh32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd <<= rs
@itemx rd <<= imm32
32-bit left shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item rsh32 rd, rs
@itemx rsh32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd >>= rs
@itemx rd >>= imm32
32-bit right logical shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item arsh32 rd, rs
@itemx arsh32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd s>>= rs
@itemx rd s>>= imm32
32-bit right arithmetic shift, by @code{rs} or @code{imm32} bits.

@item neg32 rd, rs
@itemx neg32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd = - rs
@itemx rd = - imm32
32-bit arithmetic negation.

Note that in the @code{rd = - imm32} syntax there must be at least
one white space between @code{-} and @code{imm32}.  Otherwise the
instruction is parsed as a @code{mov32 rd, imm32} instruction with a
negative 32-bit immediate.  This is a consequence of a syntactic
ambiguity in the pseudoc syntax.

@item mov32 rd, rs
@itemx mov32 rd, imm32
@itemx rd = rs
@itemx rd = imm32
Move the 32-bit value of @code{rs} in @code{rd}, or load @code{imm32}
in @code{rd}.

@item mov32s rd, rs, 8
@itemx rd = (s8) rs
Move the sign-extended 8-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.

@item mov32s rd, rs, 16
@itemx rd = (s16) rs
Move the sign-extended 16-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.

@item mov32s rd, rs, 32
@itemx rd = (s32) rs
Move the sign-extended 32-bit value in @code{rs} to @code{rd}.
@end table

@subsection Endianness conversion instructions

@table @code
@item endle rd, 16
@itemx endle rd, 32
@itemx endle rd, 64
@itemx rd = le16 rd
@itemx rd = le32 rd
@itemx rd = le64 rd
Convert the 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit value in @code{rd} to
little-endian and store it back in @code{rd}.
@item endbe %d, 16
@itemx endbe %d, 32
@itemx endbe %d, 64
@itemx rd = be16 rd
@itemx rd = be32 rd
@itemx rd = be64 rd
Convert the 16-bit, 32-bit or 64-bit value in @code{rd} to big-endian
and store it back in @code{rd}.
@end table

@subsection Byte swap instructions

@table @code
@item bswap rd, 16
@itemx rd = bswap16 rd
Swap the least-significant 16-bit word in @code{rd} with the
most-significant 16-bit word.

@item bswap rd, 32
@itemx rd = bswap32 rd
Swap the least-significant 32-bit word in @code{rd} with the
most-significant 32-bit word.

@item bswap rd, 64
@itemx rd = bswap64 rd
Swap the least-significant 64-bit word in @code{rd} with the
most-significant 64-bit word.
@end table


@subsection 64-bit load and pseudo maps

@table @code
@item lddw rd, imm64
@itemx rd = imm64 ll
Load the given signed 64-bit immediate to the destination register
@code{rd}.
@end table

@subsection Load instructions for socket filters

The following instructions are intended to be used in socket filters,
and are therefore not general-purpose: they make assumptions on the
contents of several registers.  See the file
@file{Documentation/networking/filter.txt} in the Linux kernel source
tree for more information.

Absolute loads:

@table @code
@item ldabsdw imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u64 *) skb[imm32]
Absolute 64-bit load.

@item ldabsw imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u32 *) skb[imm32]
Absolute 32-bit load.

@item ldabsh imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u16 *) skb[imm32]
Absolute 16-bit load.

@item ldabsb imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u8 *) skb[imm32]
Absolute 8-bit load.
@end table

Indirect loads:

@table @code
@item ldinddw rs, imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u64 *) skb[rs + imm32]
Indirect 64-bit load.

@item ldindw rs, imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u32 *) skb[rs + imm32]
Indirect 32-bit load.

@item ldindh rs, imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u16 *) skb[rs + imm32]
Indirect 16-bit load.

@item ldindb %s, imm32
@itemx r0 = *(u8 *) skb[rs + imm32]
Indirect 8-bit load.
@end table

@subsection Generic load/store instructions

General-purpose load and store instructions are provided for several
word sizes.

Load to register instructions:

@table @code
@item ldxdw rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(u64 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 64-bit load.

@item ldxw rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(u32 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 32-bit load.

@item ldxh rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(u16 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 16-bit load.

@item ldxb rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(u8 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 8-bit load.
@end table

Signed load to register instructions:

@table @code
@item ldxsdw rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(s64 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 64-bit signed load.

@item ldxsw rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(s32 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 32-bit signed load.

@item ldxsh rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(s16 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 16-bit signed load.

@item ldxsb rd, [rs + offset16]
@itemx rd = *(s8 *) (rs + offset16)
Generic 8-bit signed load.
@end table

Store from register instructions:

@table @code
@item stxdw [rd + offset16], %s
@itemx *(u64 *) (rd + offset16)
Generic 64-bit store.

@item stxw [rd + offset16], %s
@itemx *(u32 *) (rd + offset16)
Generic 32-bit store.

@item stxh [rd + offset16], %s
@itemx *(u16 *) (rd + offset16)
Generic 16-bit store.

@item stxb [rd + offset16], %s
@itemx *(u8 *) (rd + offset16)
Generic 8-bit store.
@end table

Store from immediates instructions:

@table @code
@item stdw [rd + offset16], imm32
@itemx *(u64 *) (rd + offset16) = imm32
Store immediate as 64-bit.

@item stw [rd + offset16], imm32
@itemx *(u32 *) (rd + offset16) = imm32
Store immediate as 32-bit.

@item sth [rd + offset16], imm32
@itemx *(u16 *) (rd + offset16) = imm32
Store immediate as 16-bit.

@item stb [rd + offset16], imm32
@itemx *(u8 *) (rd + offset16) = imm32
Store immediate as 8-bit.
@end table

@subsection Jump instructions

eBPF provides the following compare-and-jump instructions, which
compare the values of the two given registers, or the values of a
register and an immediate, and perform a branch in case the comparison
holds true.

@table @code
@item ja disp16
@itemx goto disp16
Jump-always.

@item jal disp32
@itemx gotol disp32
Jump-always, long range.

@item jeq rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jeq rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd == rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd == imm32 goto disp16
Jump if equal, unsigned.

@item jgt rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jgt rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd > rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd > imm32 goto disp16
Jump if greater, unsigned.

@item jge rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jge rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd >= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd >= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if greater or equal.

@item jlt rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jlt rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd < rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd < imm32 goto disp16
Jump if lesser.

@item jle rd , rs, disp16
@itemx jle rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd <= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd <= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if lesser or equal.

@item jset rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jset rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd & rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd & imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed equal.

@item jne rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jne rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd != rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd != imm32 goto disp16
Jump if not equal.

@item jsgt rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsgt rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s> rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s> imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed greater.

@item jsge rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsge rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s>= rd goto disp16
@itemx if rd s>= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed greater or equal.

@item jslt rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jslt rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s< rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s< imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed lesser.

@item jsle rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsle rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s<= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s<= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed lesser or equal.
@end table

A call instruction is provided in order to perform calls to other eBPF
functions, or to external kernel helpers:

@table @code
@item call disp32
@item call imm32
Jump and link to the offset @emph{disp32}, or to the kernel helper
function identified by @emph{imm32}.
@end table

Finally:

@table @code
@item exit
Terminate the eBPF program.
@end table

@subsection 32-bit jump instructions

eBPF provides the following compare-and-jump instructions, which
compare the 32-bit values of the two given registers, or the values of
a register and an immediate, and perform a branch in case the
comparison holds true.

These instructions are only available in BPF v3 or later.

@table @code
@item jeq32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jeq32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd == rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd == imm32 goto disp16
Jump if equal, unsigned.

@item jgt32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jgt32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd > rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd > imm32 goto disp16
Jump if greater, unsigned.

@item jge32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jge32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd >= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd >= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if greater or equal.

@item jlt32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jlt32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd < rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd < imm32 goto disp16
Jump if lesser.

@item jle32 rd , rs, disp16
@itemx jle32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd <= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd <= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if lesser or equal.

@item jset32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jset32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd & rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd & imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed equal.

@item jne32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jne32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd != rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd != imm32 goto disp16
Jump if not equal.

@item jsgt32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsgt32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s> rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s> imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed greater.

@item jsge32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsge32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s>= rd goto disp16
@itemx if rd s>= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed greater or equal.

@item jslt32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jslt32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s< rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s< imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed lesser.

@item jsle32 rd, rs, disp16
@itemx jsle32 rd, imm32, disp16
@itemx if rd s<= rs goto disp16
@itemx if rd s<= imm32 goto disp16
Jump if signed lesser or equal.
@end table

@subsection Atomic instructions

Atomic exchange-and-add instructions are provided in two flavors: one
for swapping 64-bit quantities and another for 32-bit quantities.

@table @code
@item aadd [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u64 *)(rd + offset16) = rs
Atomic add instruction.

@item aor [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u64 *) (rd + offset16) |= rs
Atomic or instruction.

@item aand [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u64 *) (rd + offset16) &= rs
Atomic and instruction.

@item axor [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u64 *) (rd + offset16) ^= rs
Atomic xor instruction
@item xaddw [%d+offset16],%s
Exchange-and-add a 32-bit value at the specified location.
@end table

@noindent
The following variants perform fetching before the atomic operation.

@table @code
@item afadd [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-add instruction.

@item afor [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-or instruction.

@item afand [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-and instruction.

@item afxor [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-or instruction
@end table

The above instructions were introduced in the V3 of the BPF
instruction set.  The following instruction is supported for backwards
compatibility:

@table @code
@item xadddw [rd + offset16], rs
Alias to @code{aadd}.
@end table

@subsection 32-bit atomic instructions

Atomic exchange-and-add instructions are provided in two flavors: one
for swapping 32-bit quantities and another for 32-bit quantities.

@table @code
@item aadd32 [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u32 *)(rd + offset16) = rs
Atomic add instruction.

@item aor32 [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u32 *) (rd + offset16) |= rs
Atomic or instruction.

@item aand32 [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u32 *) (rd + offset16) &= rs
Atomic and instruction.

@item axor32 [rd + offset16], rs
@itemx *(u32 *) (rd + offset16) ^= rs
Atomic xor instruction
@end table

@noindent
The following variants perform fetching before the atomic operation.

@table @code
@item afadd32 [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-add instruction.

@item afor32 [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-or instruction.

@item afand32 [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-and instruction.

@item afxor32 [dr + offset16], rs
@itemx ???
Atomic fetch-and-or instruction
@end table

The above instructions were introduced in the V3 of the BPF
instruction set.  The following instruction is supported for backwards
compatibility:

@table @code
@item xaddw [rd + offset16], rs
Alias to @code{aadd32}.
@end table
