@c Copyright (C) 2000 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node i860-Dependent
@chapter Intel i860 Dependent Features
@end ifset
@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter Intel i860 Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@ignore
@c FIXME: This is basically a stub for i860. There is tons more information
that I will add later (jle@cygnus.com). The assembler is still being
written. The i860 assembler that existed previously was never finished
and doesn't even build. Further, its not BFD_ASSEMBLER and it doesn't
do ELF (it doesn't do anything, but you get the point).
@end ignore

@cindex i860 support
@menu
* Options-i860::                i860 Command-line Options
* Directives-i860::             i860 Machine Directives
* Opcodes for i860::            i860 Opcodes
@end menu

@node Options-i860

@section i860 Command-line Options
@subsection SVR4 compatibility options 
@table @code
@item -V
Print assembler version.
@item -Qy
Ignored.
@item -Qn
Ignored.
@end table
@subsection Other options 
@table @code
@item -EL
Select little endian output (this is the default).
@item -EB
Select big endian output. Note that the i860 always reads instructions
as little endian data, so this option only effects data and not
instructions.
@end table

@node Directives-i860
@section i860 Machine Directives

@cindex machine directives, i860
@cindex i860 machine directives

@table @code
@cindex @code{dual} directive, i860
@item .dual
Enter dual instruction mode. While this directive is supported, the
preferred way to use dual instruction mode is to explicitly code
the dual bit with the @code{d.} prefix.
@end table

@table @code
@cindex @code{enddual} directive, i860
@item .enddual
Exit dual instruction mode. While this directive is supported, the
preferred way to use dual instruction mode is to explicitly code
the dual bit with the @code{d.} prefix.
@end table

@table @code
@cindex @code{atmp} directive, i860
@item .atmp
Change the temporary register used when expanding pseudo operations. The
default register is @code{r31}.
@end table

@node Opcodes for i860
@section i860 Opcodes

@cindex opcodes, i860
@cindex i860 opcodes
All of the Intel i860 machine instructions are supported.

Some opcodes are processed beyond simply emitting a single corresponding
instruction. For example, @samp{mov} and other instructions with larg
displacements may be expanded into 2 or 3 instructions (FIXME: add details).

