@c Copyright (C) 1991, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 1998 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c This is part of the GAS manual.
@c For copying conditions, see the file as.texinfo.
@ifset GENERIC
@page
@node M32R-Dependent
@chapter M32R Dependent Features
@end ifset
@ifclear GENERIC
@node Machine Dependencies
@chapter M32R Dependent Features
@end ifclear

@c start-sanitize-m32rx

@cindex M32R support
@menu
* M32R-Opts::                   M32R Options
* M32R-Warnings::               M32R Warnings
@end menu

@node M32R-Opts
@section M32R Options

@cindex options, M32R
@cindex M32R options

The Mitsubishi M32R version of @code{@value{AS}} has a few machine
dependent options:

@table @code
@item --m32rx
@cindex @samp{--m32rx} option, M32RX
@cindex architecture options, M32RX
@cindex M32R architecture options
@code{@value{AS}} can assemble code for several different members of the
Mitsubishi M32R family.  Normally the default is to assemble code for
the M32R microprocessor.  This option may be used to change the default
to the M32RX microprocessor, which adds some more instructions to the
basic M32R instruction set, and some additional parameters to some of
the original instructions.

@item --warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts
@cindex @samp{--warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts} option, M32RX
Instructs @code{@value{AS}} to produce warning messages when
questionable parallel instructions are encountered.  This option is
enabled by default, but @code{@value{GCC}} disables it when it invokes
@code{@value{AS}} directly.  Questionable instructions are those whoes
behaviour would be different if they were executed sequentially.  For
example the code fragment @samp{mv r1, r2 || mv r3, r1} produces a
different result from @samp{mv r1, r2 \n mv r3, r1} since the former
moves r1 into r3 and then r2 into r1, whereas the later moves r2 into r1
and r3.

@item --no-warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts
@cindex @samp{--no-warn-explicit-parallel-conflicts} option, M32RX
Instructs @code{@value{AS}} not to produce warning messages when
questionable parallel instructions are encountered.

@end table

@node M32R-Warnings
@section M32R Warnings

@cindex warnings, M32R
@cindex M32R warnings

There are several warning and error messages that can be produced by
@code{@value{AS}} which are specific to the M32R:

@table @code

@item output of first instruction is the same as the input of second instruction - is this intentional ?
This message is only produced if warnings for explicit parallel
conflicts have been enabled.  It indicates that the assembler has
encountered a parallel instruction in which the destination register of
the left hand instruction is used as an input register in the right hand
instruction.  For example in this code fragment
@samp{mv r1, r2 || neg r3, r1} register r1 is the destination of the
move instruction and the input to the neg instruction.

@item output of second instruction is the same as the input of first instruction - is this intentional ?
This message is only produced if warnings for explicit parallel
conflicts have been enabled.  It indicates that the assembler has
encountered a parallel instruction in which the destination register of
the right hand instruction is used as an input register in the left hand
instruction.  For example in this code fragment
@samp{mv r1, r2 || neg r2, r3} register r2 is the destination of the
neg instruction and the input to the move instruction.

@item instruction @samp{...} is for the M32RX only
This message is produced when the assembler encounters an instruction
which is only supported by the M32Rx processor, and the @samp{--m32rx}
command line flag has not been specified to allow assembly of such
instructions. 

@item only the NOP instruction can be issued in parallel on the m32r
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction which does not involve a NOP instruction and the
@samp{--m32rx} command line flag has not been specified.  Only the M32Rx
processor is able to execute two instructions in parallel.

@item instruction @samp{...} cannot be executed in parallel.
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction which is made up of one or two instructions which cannot be
executed in parallel.

@item Instructions share the same execution pipeline
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction whoes components both use the same execution pipeline.

@item Both instructions write to the link register
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction whoes components both write to the link register, one of
them as a side effect.  For example this code fragment will produce this
message:  @samp{jl r0 || mv r14, r1}

@item Destination of first instruction written to by side effect of second instruction.
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction whoes right hand component has a side effect which modifes a
register used as the destination by the left hand component.  For
example this code fragment will produce this message:
@samp{mv r1, r2 || ld r0, @@r1+} 

@item Destination of second instruction written to by side effect of first instruction.
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction whoes left hand component has a side effect which modifes a
register used as the destination by the right hand component.  For
example this code fragment will produce this message:
@samp{st r2, @@-r1 || mv r1, r3} 

@item Instructions write to the same destination register.
This message is produced when the assembler encounters a parallel
instruction where both components attempt to modify the same register.
For example this code fragment will produce this message:
@samp{mv r1, r2 || neg r1, r3}

@end table
@c end-sanitize-m32rx
